2021
NATIONAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
EDUCATION STANDARDS

This publication is distributed by the U.S. Department of
Transportation (DOT), National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA), in the interest of information exchange.
The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of
law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document
is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing
requirements under the law or agency policies.
The United States Government assumes no liability for its content
or use thereof. If trade or manufacturers’ names or products are
mentioned, it is because they are considered essential to the object
of the publication and should not be construed as an endorsement.
The United States Government does not endorse products or
manufacturers.
National EMS Education Standards 2021. Washington, DC:
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

Technical Report Documentation Page

Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................................... 3
Introduction and the Evolution of EMS in the United States .................................................................................. 5
About the Revised EMS Education Standards ......................................................................................................... 15
Summary of Significant Changes to the EMS Education Standards ...................................................................... 23
National EMS Education Standards .......................................................................................................................... 28
Preparatory ........................................................................................................................................................... 28
Anatomy and Physiology ....................................................................................................................................... 31
Medical Terminology .............................................................................................................................................. 31
Pathophysiology .................................................................................................................................................... 31
Life Span Development ......................................................................................................................................... 31
Public Health .......................................................................................................................................................... 32
Pharmacology ........................................................................................................................................................ 33
Airway Management, Respiration and Artificial Ventilation ................................................................................... 35
Assessment ........................................................................................................................................................... 36
Medicine ................................................................................................................................................................. 38
Shock and Resuscitation ....................................................................................................................................... 45
Trauma .................................................................................................................................................................. 46
Special Patient Populations ................................................................................................................................... 50
EMS Operations ..................................................................................................................................................... 52
Clinical Behavior/Judgment ................................................................................................................................... 54
Educational Infrastructure ...................................................................................................................................... 56
Glossary ....................................................................................................................................................................... 59
References ................................................................................................................................................................... 62
Acknowledgements and Stakeholder Input .............................................................................................................. 63
Appendix A: Resources for EMS .............................................................................................................................. 65
2

Back to Table of Contents >
Executive Summary
In 2009, the EMS community came together to create the The following areas within the Standards had notable revisions:
original National EMS Education Standards (the Standards). public health; pediatrics; geriatrics, behavioral/psychiatric; cultural
This represented a major step toward realizing the vision put humility; EMS operations; pharmacology; and EMS safety,
forth in the 1996 EMS Agenda for the Future and was further wellness and resilience. Input was provided and every suggestion
outlined in the EMS Education Agenda for the Future: A Systems or recommendation was considered. Revision and adjustments
Approach four years later. This new version of the Standards were based on a team discussion, with expert consultation when
builds on the foundation created by those landmark documents needed.
and other achievements of the last quarter-century, including
EMS Agenda 2050 and the National Scope of Practice Model. When applying the Standards to individual programs and
classes, EMS educators have the freedom to develop their own
The National EMS Education Standards outline the minimal curricula or use any of the wide variety of lesson plans and
competencies for entry-level EMS clinicians to perform their instructional resources that are available. This ensures that
roles as outlined in the 2019 and 2021* updated National each program can specifically address individual and community
EMS Scope of Practice Model. The Standards, while a needs.
national effort, were intentionally created in a way that allows
for diverse implementation methods to meet local needs The Standards are not intended to stand as a comprehensive
and evolving educational practices. This less prescriptive document guiding the entire development of EMS clinicians,
format of the Standards allows for ongoing revision of EMS but rather one part of a comprehensive system. EMS education
educational content consistent with scientific evidence, programs will incorporate each element of the education system
educational practices, and community standards of care. proposed in the Education Agenda.
Noteworthy revisions found in the 2021 edition of the Standards These elements include:
are based upon input and considerations obtained from
• National EMS Core Content
numerous sources. These include stakeholder and public
• National EMS Scope of Practice Model
comments, national guidance documents (the original 2009
National EMS Education Standards, EMS Agenda 2050, and • National EMS Education Standards
the 2019 and 2021* updated National Scope of Practice Model),
• National EMS Certification
the National Registry of EMT’s practice analysis, technological
• National EMS Program Accreditation
advances, known and evolving best practices, and evidence-
based medicine.
This integrated system approach to EMS education is essential
to achieving the goal of developing EMS clinicians across the
* As a result of the 2020-21 public health emergency, several changes were made under the country who are competent in the appropriate knowledge, skills,
urgent update process to the 2019 National EMS Scope of Practice Model which are reflected in
and abilities for their licensure level.
these education standards.
3

Back to Table of Contents >
Revision Process
Distributed to
Stakeholders & Revision/
Public for Additional Adjustment
Comment and
Transparency
Team
Evaluation &
Expert
Consensus
January 2019 March 2021
Project Commencement Project Completion
Inputs
Stakeholder Comments NREMT Practice Analysis
Public Comments Evidence-Based Medicine
Technological Advances Known/Evolving Best Practices
Related Government Resource Documents
4

Back to Table of Contents >
Introduction and the Evolution of EMS in the United States
EMS has evolved and grown significantly since the first organized, The Agenda was designed to guide government and private
national effort to develop EMS systems began in the 1960s. organizations in EMS planning, development, and policymaking
Compared to colleagues in health care and public safety, at the national, state and local levels. It addressed 14 attributes of
EMS remains a young profession and continues to advance EMS, including the EMS education system, and defined a vision for
as we further define and enhance our structure, oversight and EMS education “based on research” and “conducted by qualified
organization. instructors” while employing “sound educational principles.”
As EMS system operations have developed, so has EMS EMS Education Conference
education. In the early 1970s, registered nurses and physicians
taught most EMS programs. Few student and instructor Soon after publication of the Agenda, representatives of
resources related directly to prehospital emergency care. No 30 EMS-related organizations met at an EMS Education
standards existed to define what EMS clinicians should know Conference sponsored by NHTSA to identify the necessary
and what they should be able to do. By the early 2000s, most steps for implementing that vision.
of this original framework was being replaced, and national
education standards and a scope of practice were defined The EMS Education Conference resulted in several
for the first time. Today, the profession has become more recommendations, including:
sophisticated, and community expectations have increased.
• The National EMS Education and Practice Blueprint (the
With health care, technology and science evolving faster than
Blueprint) is a valuable component of the EMS education
ever, it is also important to revisit these topics and update these
system. A multidisciplinary panel, led by NHTSA, to
guidelines more frequently.
identify core educational content more explicitly for each
licensure level, should revise it.
EMS Agenda for the Future
• National EMS Education Standards are necessary
In August 1996, the EMS Agenda for the Future (the Agenda)
but need not include specific declarative material or
was published. Developed with funding from the National
lesson plans. NHTSA should support and facilitate the
Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the Health Resources
development of national EMS Education Standards.
and Services Administration, and led by the National Association
of EMS Physicians and the National Association of State EMS • The Blueprint and national EMS Education Standards
Directors, the Agenda brought together stakeholders from should be revised periodically, with major revisions
throughout EMS to create a unifying vision for emergency occurring every 5 to 7 years, and minor updates made
medical services in the United States. every 2 to 3 years.
5

Back to Table of Contents >
EMS Education Agenda for the Future National EMS Core Content
In 1998, NHTSA convened a group of educators who developed The National EMS Core Content was published in 2005. Core
a document titled EMS Education Agenda for the Future: A Content defines the entire domain of out-of-hospital practice and
Systems Approach (the Education Agenda). The EMS education identifies the universal body of knowledge and skills for EMS
system envisioned in the EMS Agenda for the Future was clinicians who do not function as independent practitioners.
further defined and articulated in the Education Agenda (see
Figure 1). The Education Agenda’s authors also stated that, Funded by NHTSA and HRSA, this project was led by the
to be most effective, each component in the EMS education National Association of EMS Physicians and the American
system should be structured, coordinated and interdependent. College of Emergency Physicians.
EMS Education Agenda for the Future: A Systems Approach
The Universe of EMS
National EMS Core Content
Knowledge and Skills
Periodic updates
Delineation of provider
National EMS Scope of Practice of these three
practice levels
documents
Delineation of provider
National EMS Education Standards
educational competencies
National EMS Certification National EMS Education Program Accreditation
A single agency for each function – Standard exam, minimum competence, consumer protection
Figure 1: Model EMS System
6

Back to Table of Contents >
National EMS Scope of Practice not to update the separate Instructional Guidelines for each
clinician level originally published as companion documents to the
The National EMS Scope of Practice Model (the Scope of 2009 Standards. Instead, the Instructional Guidelines have been
Practice) is a consensus document that was published in incorporated within the Standards, replacing the need for those
2007 and revised in 2019. This document defines four levels supplemental materials.
of EMS licensure—emergency medical responder (EMR),
emergency medical technician (EMT), advanced emergency National EMS certification and national EMS education
medical technician (AEMT) and paramedic—and delineates the program accreditation are the “bookends” that support the
practices and minimum competencies for each level. The Scope other key elements of the system. The Education Agenda
of Practice does not have regulatory authority but provides recommended an individual should graduate from a nationally
guidance to states. Adherence to the Scope of Practice would accredited EMS education program to be eligible for National
increase uniformity in EMS practice throughout the U.S. and EMS Certification. Essential components of the EMS
facilitate reciprocity between states. Leadership for this project Agenda include a single National EMS Accreditation Agency
was delegated to the National Association of State EMS Officials and a single National EMS Certification Agency to ensure
and funded by NHTSA and HRSA. consistency and quality of EMS personnel.
The Scope of Practice further defines practice, suggests
minimum educational preparation, and designates appropriate
psychomotor skills at each level of licensure. Further, the
document describes each level of licensure as distinct
and distinguished by unique “skills, practice environment,
knowledge, qualifications, services provided, risk, level of
supervisory responsibility, and amount of autonomy and
judgment/critical thinking/decision-making.”
National EMS Education Standards
The National EMS Education Standards replaced the NHTSA
National Standard Curricula at all licensure levels when first
published in 2009. The Standards define the competencies, clinical
behaviors, and judgments that should be met by entry-level EMS
clinicians to meet practice guidelines defined in the Scope of
Practice. Content and concepts defined in the National EMS Core
Content are also integrated within the Standards. Leadership for
this project was delegated to the RedFlash Group and National
Association of EMS Educators, and funded by NHTSA and HRSA.
With input from a large number of stakeholders, the team chose
7

Back to Table of Contents >
8
s0791
Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation
and Federal
Government
Funded regional EMS
systems and
demonstration projects
s0591
0691
6691
6691
National Academy of
Science published
Highway Safety
Accidental Death and
Act of 1966
President’s Committee Disability: The Neglected
American College for Traffic Safety Disease of Modern Society Required each State
to adopt highway
of Surgeons
Recognized the need Quantified the scope of safety programs to
Developed the first to address emergency traffic-related death in the U.S., comply with federal
training program for care in reducing traffic including the deficiencies in standards, including
ambulance attendants fatalities prehospital care “emergency services”
s0791
3791
A Brief History of EMS Education in the United States
This timeline outlines key events in the development of EMS education in the United States
from the 1950s to the present.
Emergency Medical Services Act of
1973 enacted by Congress as Title XII
Crash Injury of the Public Health Services Act
Management for the
Provided more than $300 million in
Law Enforcement Officer EMS funding over 8 years that allowed
for EMS system planning and
published by NHTSA
implementation, mandated states to
40-hour program that focus on EMS personnel and training,
evolved into First and resulted in legislation and
Responder: NSC in 1979 regulation of EMS personnel levels
0791
National Registry
of EMTs (NREMT)
Held first board
meeting, with goal to
provide uniform
standards for
credentialing
ambulance
attendants
1791
Emergency Care and
Transportation of the
Sick and Injured
published by the
American Academy of
Orthopedic Surgeons (AAOS)
One of the first EMS
textbooks

Back to Table of Contents >
9
5791 American Medical
Association (AMA)
Recognized EMT-Paramedic
as an allied health occupation
7791
8791 5891
0991
The Essentials for
Paramedic Program First Responder,
Accreditation EMT-Ambulance (EMT-A),
National Standard
developed by AMA EMT-Intermediate (EMT-I), NHTSA hosts EMS
Curriculum (NSC) for
and EMT-Paramedic Training Workshop
EMT-Paramedic Joint Review Committee
published by NHTSA on Education Programs (EMT-P): NSC revised by Facilitated the development
for the EMT-Paramedic NHTSA of the 1990s curricula and
The original NSC (JRCEMT-P) adopted introduced the
consisted of 15 The Essentials as the EMT-Paramedic reformatted assessment-based
instructional modules standard for accreditation into six divisions education concept
4991
4991
5991 First Responder:
NSC is revised
2991 EMS Education and
Practice Blueprint
Document served as a template
for the revised format of the
1990s NSC revision projects
6991
EMS Agenda for the
Future is created
Vision statement
NREMT Practice Analysis
created by NAEMSP
Determined frequency and NASEMSO for
and criticality of EMS integration of EMS
interventions, and into the health care
provided the foundation system; funded by
for NREMT test blueprint NHTSA and HRSA
8991
PEW Health Professions
Commission Taskforce on Health
EMT-A revised and
Care Workforce Regulation
renamed EMT-Basic
published Strengthening Consumer
(EMT-B): NSC
Protection: Priorities for Health
Care Workforce Regulation
Recommended a National Policy
Advisory Board to establish
standards and model legislative
language for uniform scope of
practice authority for health
professions

Back to Table of Contents >
10
9102 9102
1202
National EMS Education Standards
National EMS Scope of Practice
EMS Agenda revised and published by NHTSA
Model revised and published
by NHTSA 2050 National guideline to define the entry-level
A people-centered, education requirement for each level of EMS
The document adjusted for clinician. The document contains revised education community-driven
changes in EMS delivery and standards reflecting the EMS Agenda 2050,
vision document
made revisions between the National EMS Scope of Practice Model (as
describing EMS
first edition (2007) and current updated), advances in technology, evidence-based
in the future
times (2019) medicine and evolving known best practices.
6002
7002
9102
9002
2019
Practice
Analysis
conducted
by NREMT
8991 EMT-P:
NSC revised
9991 EMT-I:
NSC revised
0002
Education Agenda for
the Future: A Systems
Approach published
by NHTSA
Funded by NHTSA and
HRSA, developed an
integrated system of EMS
regulation, certification
and licensure
4002
2004 National EMS Practice
Analysis published by NREMT
Updated the 1994 Practice
Analysis
5002
5002 The State of EMS Education EMS
Research Project: Characteristics of
EMS Educators by Ruple et al. in
National EMS Core Content Prehospital Emergency Care
published by NHTSA and HRSA
Research related to identifying
Defines the EMS personnel characteristics of EMS instructors,
domain of knowledge described describing infrastructure available
in the National Scope of Practice, to instructors, and identifying
and the universal knowledge and instructor attributes necessary for
skills of EMS personnel implementing education standards
EMS at the Crossroads Institute National EMS Education
of Medicine Report Standards published by NHTSA
National EMS Scope of Practice
Among other recommendations, required National set of guidelines that
Model published by NHTSA
national accreditation of paramedic defined the entry-level education
programs, adopting a common scope of National guidelines based requirement for each level of
practice for EMS personnel with state on the National EMS Core EMS clinician, and contained four
licensing reciprocity and national certification Content that defined levels companion Instructional Guideline
as a prerequisite for state licensure and local of EMS licensure and their documents to assist educators in
credentialing of EMS providers scopes of practice transitioning from the NSC

Back to Table of Contents >
The National EMS Education Standards
Each statement in the The National EMS Education Standards is comprised of four components (Table 1):
Standards presumes that
the expected knowledge 1. Competency (yellow) – This statement 3. Clinical Behaviors/Judgments (green) – This
and behaviors are within represents the minimum competency required for section describes the clinical behaviors and
the scope of practice for entry-level clinicians at each licensure level. judgments essential for entry-level EMS clinicians
that EMS licensure level, as 2. Knowledge (blue) – This represents an at each licensure level.
defined by the National EMS elaboration of the knowledge within each 4. Educational Infrastructure (gray) – This section
Scope of Practice Model. competency (when appropriate) that entry-level describes the support standards necessary
Each competency applies to clinicians would need to master to achieve for conducting EMS training programs at each
patients of all ages. competency. licensure level.
The Standards also assume
there is a progression in
practice from the emergency
Table 1: Format of National EMS Education Standards
medical responder level to
the paramedic level. That is,
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
licensed personnel at each
level are responsible for all
Content Area Competency Competency Competency Competency
knowledge, judgments, and
behaviors at their level and at
Elaboration of Additional knowledge Additional knowledge Additional knowledge Additional knowledge
all levels preceding their level.
related to the competency related to the competency related to the competency related to the competency
Knowledge
For example, a paramedic is
responsible for the knowledge Clinical behaviors and Clinical behaviors and Clinical behaviors and Clinical behaviors and
and tasks described for the judgments judgments judgments judgments
paramedic as well as the Educational Infrastructure Educational Infrastructure Educational Infrastructure Educational Infrastructure
other three levels of licensure.
11

Back to Table of Contents >
The descriptors used to illustrate the increasing complexity of a particular competency. For example, EMS instructors need
knowledge and behaviors through the progression of licensure to ensure the emergency medical responder has a thorough
levels originate, in part, from the National EMS Scope of Practice understanding of how to use the bag valve mask (BVM) safely
Model. These terms reflect the differences in the breadth, depth and effectively. The amount of detail the instructor provides about
and actions required at each licensure level (Figures 2 and 2.1). how to use that BVM represents the depth of knowledge. Some
instructors might adjust their specific curriculum to provide slightly
The depth of knowledge is the amount of detail a student needs more information about the BVM compared to other instructors,
to know about a particular topic. The breadth of knowledge refers but every graduating EMR will know how to use the device.
to the number of topics or issues a student needs to learn in
Figure 2: Depth/Breadth Terminology
Simple Breadth/ Foundational Breadth/ Comprehensive Breadth/
Simple Depth Fundamental Depth Complex Depth
Exten G s a iv th e e H rin is g tory Epidemiology
Sign R s e & co S g y n m iz p e t s oms S A MPLE Sign R s e & co S g y n m iz p e t s oms OPQ R S T
h
o- S o c
p
i e a c l t s S A MPLE Sign R s e & co S g y n m iz p e t s oms OPQ R S T E xte n s iv e
A
Recognize Recognize P s y c A s Recognize n a to
m
y
R Ad e j a u s s B t s T e a h s s R e e s e d ra c o p a n y ll R P M r e a o c n t a o a l c g l o e A l m c | T e ti h n o e t n ory P a th o p h ysio L l im o it g e d y R Ad e j a us s B t s T a e h s s R e e s e d ra c o p a n y ll R P M r e a o c n t a o a l c g l o e A l m | c T e ti h n o e t n ory Li mit e d A ut o n o m y M a n a g e P r m e d i e c t n io t n s o f P a th o p h ysio L l im o it g e d y R Ad e j a us s B t s T a e h s s R e e s e d ra c o p a n y ll R P M r e a o c n t a o a l c g l o e A l m | c T e ti h n o e t n ory Li mit e d A ut o n o m y I n e - d r e e p n t h ti al Di a g n o si s
Limited Differential Limited Differential Diff
Diagnosis Path E o x p t h e y n s s i i o v l e o gy Diagnosis A C lte o r n n d a i t t i i v o e n s
• Minimal Knowledge • Elemental Knowledge • Deep Level of Knowledge
• Minimal Range of Skills or Tasks • Increased Range of Skills or Tasks • Wide-Ranging, Broad and Extensive Skills or Tasks
• Lifelong Learning
12

Back to Table of Contents >
Because of the limited scope of practice for the EMR (fewer To describe the intended depth of knowledge of a particular
tools in the airway box), the instructor may supplement BVM concept within a provider level, the revision team uses the
education with a few additional concepts (breadth) surrounding terms simple, fundamental and complex. These terms can
management of a patient’s airway, such as airway anatomy seem ambiguous and confusing when used in isolation (e.g.,
and assessment. Supplementing the education with additional learning to correctly use a BVM is not a “simple” task). Instead,
concepts adds to the breadth of the material, with each concept the meaning of each term is relative to the other terms. For
having its own level of detail (depth) limited only by the amount example, knowledge that is categorized as “simple” is only
of the time the instructor has to teach the material. As more simple relative to another curriculum that provides more detail,
airway management tools are added to the toolbox for each such as when comparing EMT to AEMT. EMT students may
licensure level (EMT, AEMT, paramedic), the level of detail need a greater level of airway anatomy detail because the
will also change, and curriculum length will need to reflect this scope of practice is different. Scope of practice is even more
increased depth. different for the AEMT and paramedic student, who will need
increasingly greater levels of airway anatomy detail (complex).
Course directors, instructors, medical directors and local
stakeholders can decide the precise level of detail based on
community and student needs rather than establishing a single
prescriptive curriculum for the entire nation.
Similarly, the intended breadth of knowledge surrounding a
Complex
Lifelong Professional-Level concept is reflected in the terms simple, foundational and
Learning Knowledge comprehensive. As curricula include an increasing level of
Expansive & Detailed detail about the use of the BVM, airway assessment and airway
Lifelong Learning
anatomy, the increasing size of the toolbox reflected by the
Fundamental
increased scope of practice necessitates a broader list of related
Integrates
subjects. For example, the addition of CPAP, nasopharyngeal
airway and oxygen delivery devices at the EMT level broadens
the curriculum for the EMT instructor. For instructors teaching
Applies
Simple paramedic students, the increased scope of practice broadens
Lifelong
the knowledge base even more. Clearly, the use of CPAP
Learning
requires the EMT to have an increased depth and more complex
Uses
breadth of knowledge than the EMR, but not nearly as much as
the paramedic.
Breadth (How much material?)
Technician-Level
Knowledge
Simple Foundational Comprehensive
Rudimentary
13
)?liated
hcum
woH(
htpeD
Figure 2.1: Depth/Breadth Terminology

Back to Table of Contents >
EMS Personnel Licensure Levels
These licensure levels are from the National EMS Scope of Practice Model. Each educational level assumes mastery of previously
stated competencies. Every clinician must demonstrate each competency within their scope of practice and for patients of all ages.
Emergency Medical Emergency Medical Advanced Emergency Paramedic
Responder Technician Medical Technician
The emergency medical responder An emergency medical technician (EMT) The advanced emergency medical The paramedic is a health professional
(EMR) is an out-of-hospital practitioner is a health professional whose primary technician (AEMT) is a health professional whose primary focus is to respond to,
whose primary focus is to initiate focus is to respond to, assess and triage whose primary focus is to respond to, assess and triage emergent, urgent and
immediate lifesaving care to patients emergent, urgent and non-urgent requests assess and triage non-urgent, urgent and non-urgent requests for medical care;
while ensuring patient access to the for medical care, and to apply basic emergent requests for medical care; apply apply basic and advanced knowledge
emergency medical services system. knowledge and skills necessary to provide basic and focused advanced knowledge and skills necessary to determine
EMRs possess the basic knowledge and patient care and medical transportation to/ and skills necessary to provide patient patient physiologic, psychological,
skills necessary to provide lifesaving from an emergency or health care facility. care and/or medical transportation; and and psychosocial needs; administer
interventions while awaiting additional Depending on a patient’s needs and/or facilitate access to a higher level of care medications, interpret and use diagnostic
EMS response and rely on an EMS or system resources, EMTs are sometimes when the needs of the patient exceed the findings to implement treatment; provide
public safety agency or larger scene the highest level of care a patient will capability level of the AEMT. The additional complex patient care; and facilitate
response that includes other higher-level receive during an ambulance transport. preparation beyond EMT prepares referrals and/or access to a higher
medical personnel. When practicing in EMTs often are paired with higher levels an AEMT to improve patient care in level of care when the needs of the
less populated areas, EMRs may have of personnel as part of an ambulance common emergency conditions for which patient exceed the capability level of the
a low call volume coupled with being the crew or other responding group. With reasonably safe, targeted and evidence- paramedic. Paramedics often serve as a
only care personnel for prolonged periods proper supervision, EMTs may serve as based interventions exist. Interventions patient care team member in a hospital
awaiting arrival of higher levels of care. a patient care team member in a hospital within the AEMT scope of practice may or other health care setting to the full
EMRs may assist, but should not be the or health care setting to the full extent of carry more risk if not performed properly extent of their education, certification,
highest-level person caring for a patient their education, certification, licensure than interventions authorized for the EMR/ licensure and credentialing. Paramedics
during ambulance transport. EMRs are and credentialing. In a community setting, EMT levels. With proper supervision, may work in community settings where
often the first to arrive on scene. They an EMT might visit patients at home and AEMTs may serve as a patient care they take on additional responsibilities
must quickly assess patient needs, make observations that are reported to team member in a hospital or health care monitoring and evaluating the needs of
initiate treatment and request additional a higher-level authority to help manage setting to the full extent of their education, at-risk patients, as well as intervening
resources. a patient’s care. When practicing in less certification, licensure and credentialing. In to mitigate conditions that could lead to
populated areas, EMTs may have low call a community setting, an AEMT might visit poor outcomes. Paramedics help educate
volume coupled with being the only care patients at home and make observations patients and the public in the prevention
personnel during prolonged transports. that are reported to a higher-level authority and/or management of medical, health,
EMTs may provide minimal supervision of to help manage a patient’s care. psychological and safety issues.
lower-level personnel. EMTs can be the
first to arrive on scene; they are expected
to quickly assess patient conditions,
provide stabilizing measures and request
additional resources as needed.
14

Back to Table of Contents >
About the Revised EMS Education Standards
2019 National EMS Scope of Practice Model Relationship System (NEMSIS). In addition, the project revision team has
reached out to NREMT throughout the revision project to obtain
The recently released 2019 National EMS Scope of Practice input and feedback. NREMT’s practice analysis has been one of
Model, funded by NHTSA and HRSA, assembled experts to many critical resources consulted by the revision team.
evaluate the scope of EMS practice for each of the four national
practitioner levels (EMR, EMT, AEMT and paramedic). The Domains of EMS: Learning, Competency, Authorization and
2019 Scope of Practice Model is the launching pad and guide
Operational/Local Qualification
for this revision of the National EMS Education Standards. The
Education Standards reflect the 2019 and 2021 updated Scope
The 2019 National EMS Scope of Practice Model identifies four
of Practice Model and ensure practitioners receive the education
domains within the “Professional Scope of Practice” and provides
and training they need to perform within their scopes and best
a structure for the differences between education, certification,
serve their patients and communities.
licensure and credentialing (see definitions below). The EMS
Education Standards Revision Team focused on education, or
The revision of the National EMS Scope of Practice Model and
the learning domain.
National EMS Education Standards are naturally interrelated,
as one informs the other. As such, the team brought together
• Education, the learning domain – This domain includes
to lead the revision of the National EMS Education Standards
all didactic, psychomotor, and affective learning that an
was funded by NHTSA and HRSA, and included 10 proven and
EMS learner should be taught during an EMS course to
renowned EMS educators. The National EMS Scope of Practice
become an entry-level apprentice.
Model, recommendations from EMS Agenda 2050, known best
practices, emerging technology, evidence-based medicine,
• Certification, the competency verification domain –
information from the National EMS Database and societal issues
This domain includes all external evaluation and verification
were all considered. EMS stakeholder input and public comment
processes that are led by an outside entity to ensure that a
were solicited and received multiple times throughout the revision
learner has achieved competency to be safe and effective
process. The National Registry of EMTs also provided its Practice
when conducting duties as an entry-level EMS clinician. In
Analysis findings.
most states, National Registry certification is used to verify
competency.
NREMT Practice Analysis
• Licensure, the legal authorization domain – Licensure
Several members of the EMS Education Standards Revision
refers to the legal authority, granted by a state, to an
Team were involved in the NREMT’s practice analysis working
individual to perform certain defined and restricted duties.
group. This process has informed the team regarding the most
The clinical duties usually vary from one state to the
encountered EMS emergencies, according to the National EMS
next. The term is not to be confused or referred to as
Database, made possible by the National EMS Information
“certification.” As defined in the 2019 Scope of Practice
15

Back to Table of Contents >
Model, certification and licensure are independent yet When a learner successfully concludes coursework and has
related processes. When state requirements are met, a satisfied a program’s identified terminal requirements (Education
state license is issued along with the legal authority to Domain), the apprentice can then sit for an evaluation that
perform a role at the appropriate level of licensure. provides verification of competency (Certification Domain). After
successfully navigating the Licensure Domain with a state, a
• Credentialing, the operational/local qualification learner is deemed “entry-level.” Finally, the entry-level clinician
domain – Credentialing is the responsibility of the is ready for the Credentialing Domain of an employer, after
individual EMS organization and, in most cases, the which the learner is “job-ready.” The term “entry-level” indicates
medical director. Being that a learner has been educated, that a learner has completed the education, certification, and
certified and licensed, the duty falls to the organization licensure domains. “Job-ready” indicates that a learner has been
and local community to ensure that the EMS clinician is credentialed by an employer and the local medical director, and
able to operate safely by following appropriate clinical and is competent in the system’s operational and clinical guidelines,
operational guidelines and philosophies set forth by the policies and philosophies.
physician EMS medical director. Typically, this involves
orientation courses with an evaluation and structured Common comments and recommendations that were received
operational and clinical training programs. Credentialed by the revision team addressed content areas that clearly did
providers have been taught and assessed on skills and not apply to the entry-level education of an apprentice EMS
actions that are beyond the entry-level education and clinician. Many suggestions fit within the credentialing domain
training of an EMS school. For instance, if allowed by the and are not appropriate for national adoption at this time. The
state, ultrasound may be a role performed after proper team worked hard to stay within the education domain for entry-
credentialing by the local EMS medical director and level EMS clinicians.
jurisdiction, even though ultrasound is not included in the
National EMS Scope of Practice Model or the National Education Standards vs. Instructional Guidelines
EMS Education Standards.
vs. Curriculum
Because most EMS education programs teach students who will
The National EMS Education Standards outline the minimal
not all practice in the same organization, communities or even
competencies for entry-level EMS clinicians to achieve within
states, a one-size-fits-all education is not possible. The writing of
the parameters outlined in the 2019 and 2021 updated Scope
a detailed national curricula for each of the four levels would be
of Practice Model. Education programs should contemplate the
problematic. No educational institution can teach a learner every
Standards when developing curricula for national consistency.
possible clinical or operational guideline or associated philosophy,
The Standards’ format will allow diverse implementation methods
nor can an educational entity train an individual about every clinical
to meet local needs and evolving education practices. The less
device used by EMS services across the nation. As a result, the
prescriptive format of the Standards will also allow for ongoing
credentialing process is a critical piece of preparing EMS clinicians
revision of content consistent with scientific evidence, advances in
to practice in their respective organizations after the completion of
technology, known “best practices” and community standards of
initial education and certification.
care.
16

Back to Table of Contents >
In general, the content of education standards can range from This integrated system is essential to achieving the goals of
largely non-prescriptive to detailed and very prescriptive. program efficiency, consistency of instructional quality and
student competence as outlined in the Education Agenda.
Non-Prescriptive Education Standards:
While the Education Standards are developed at the national
• increase teacher autonomy
level, each state retains the right to wholly adopt the Standards
• increase instructional flexibility
or adopt and modify the Education Standards to fit a state’s
• increase responsiveness to student learning needs unique needs. The National EMS Education Standards have
• increase responsiveness to local needs and situations been created to provide states with a vetted, consensus-driven
foundation for EMS education. They also benefit clinicians by
• increase responsiveness to national trends
paving the way for national certification and easier transition
from one locality or state to another.
Prescriptive Education Standards:
• improve education consistency
Individual EMS educators and local communities select or
• protect from societal harm that may result from low create curricula based on a multitude of curriculum influencers.
education expectations and/or low-quality instruction These influencers can also be strong mechanisms for education
program accountability. Regional needs, accreditation standards
• have been labeled as “burdensome checklists” by some
and state and local policies and regulations are a few examples.
educators and are problematic in medicine due to rapid
Curricula design, implementation and adjustment are complex
changes in technology, scientific evidence and best
processes. Specific curricular content, instructional strategies
practices
and competency evaluation processes should be resolved at the
education program level through implementation and feedback.
The National EMS Education Standards are not meant to stand
Regulatory rules must be adhered to as well. Decisions on
as a comprehensive document guiding all of the development of
curriculum implementation are based on local situations,
EMS clinicians, but rather one part of a comprehensive system
students’ needs and available resources. Figure 3 illustrates
(Figure 3). EMS education programs will incorporate each
numerous inputs and points for accountability when curricula
element of the education system proposed in the Education
are designed, implemented and adjusted. Program directors,
Agenda. These elements include:
faculty and education institutions would be wise to consider
each influence.
• National EMS Core Content
• National EMS Scope of Practice
• National EMS Education Standards
• National EMS Certification
• National EMS Program Accreditation
17

Back to Table of Contents >
Figure 3: Influences on EMS Education Curriculum Development
Federal State & Regional
• EMS Education Agenda for the Future: • State laws and regulations
•
A
N a
S
ti
y
o
s
n
te
a
m
l E
s
M
A
S
p p
C
ro
o
a
re
c h
Content I
mplementatio
n
•
•
R
St
e
a
g
k
i
e
o
h
n
o
a
l
l
d
r
e
e
r
q
i
u
n
i
t
r
e
e
r
m
es
e
t
n
s
ts
• National EMS Scope of Practice Model
Program
• National EMS Education Standards
• EMS Agenda 2050 and
• Stakeholder interests Course
Curriculum
Accrediting & Certifying Advances in EMS
Organizations
Feedback • Evidence-based medicine
• Technology
• CAAHEP/CoAEMSP1
• Known and evolving best practices
• National Registry of EMTs
- Practice analysis
• Stakeholder interests Local
• Resources • Local advisory committees
• Student needs • Stakeholder interests
• Community needs • Employers
• Medical direction
1 CAAHEP: Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs, CoAEMSP: Committee
on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the Emergency Medical Services Professions
Where are the Instructional Guidelines? It was also evident that, while much of the IGs remained
relevant, several sections had become outdated because
The 2009 instructional guidelines (IGs) were originally designed of changes in evidence-based medicine, best practices or
to help educators transition from the National Standard Curricula technology. Simultaneously, it was felt that it would be useful to
developed in the 1990s to the 2009 Education Standards. have a level of specificity within the Education Standards rather
than require educators to look in multiple places when seeking
When the revision team met, a discussion ensued regarding guidance to create curricula.
the ongoing usefulness of the IGs in their current form. It was
agreed that the addition of the existing four IGs (EMR, EMT, The resulting document combined elements of the IGs with
AEMT and paramedic) to the Education Standards made the the overarching principles of the Education Standards. A level
documents too cumbersome to be easily useful. of knowledge depth and breadth is provided for each section
18

Back to Table of Contents >
of the Standards. At a glance, trained educators will be able national stakeholder called for courses in health systems
to determine the extent of information to be provided to their science and value-based care. Suggested courses included:
students. The result is an enriched blueprint of the education
• Health care system structure and processes
and training of today’s EMS clinicians.
• Health care policy, economics, and management
Beyond the Scope of the Project • Clinical informatics and health information technology
• Public/population health
There are four areas that were frequently brought up by
• Health system improvement and person-centered care
stakeholders but not part of the project. Specialty certification
education (critical care paramedic, community paramedic, • Structure and processes beyond EMS
tactical medic); degree requirements at any clinician level;
• Health care reimbursement and finance
nomenclature of the EMS profession and clinicians; and
• Health care quality and safety
continuing education requirements were beyond the scope
of this effort. Instead, the focus was to align the Education
AEMT Accreditation
Standards with the newly released 2019 Scope of Practice
Model.
The 2019 National EMS Scope of Practice Model subject
matter expert panel recommended requiring AEMT program
Degree Requirements
accreditation by January 1, 2025. The panel deliberated and
The revision team heard numerous comments regarding came to a consensus on the matter with the involvement of 13
degree requirements. Clearly, some parties strongly desire stakeholders and various independent contributors. Despite this
degree requirements for paramedics. Others strongly understanding in 2019, the topic continues to be passionately
oppose them. Currently, there is not an industry consensus debated. The Education Standards revision team supports this
for degree requirements for EMS personnel. In many cases, recommendation. The revision team deliberated the topic and
several significant EMS stakeholders and the “larger” EMS concluded that accreditation is an original and identified goal of
community take a more neutral position. Time will allow the 2000 EMS Education Agenda. Through the use of collegial
for further discussion and debate on the topic. Early in the evaluation practices and the identification of recognized routines
process, the team was advised that the debate for or against for establishing sound EMS education programs, program
degrees was beyond the scope of the project as the 2021 accreditation is expected to promote clinical and educational
National EMS Education Standards do not address degree excellence by ensuring the availability of adequate resources
requirements. and services for educators and their students.
The team also received recommendations for education Portable Technologies
related to deeper clinical subject matter, leadership and
management, public health, education, social work, During the public comment periods, many participants identified
research, and other areas related to EMS systems. One the need for education standards that covered new and
19

Back to Table of Contents >
emerging technologies. There were specific and repeated Simulation
recommendations for Point-of-Care Ultrasound (POCUS);
EMS simulation begins in the classroom with educators
the 2019 Scope of Practice Model subject matter experts
creating realistic scenarios to train all levels of EMS
directly addressed this skill and have determined that “portable
personnel. The practice of allowing students to memorize
technology” (which includes POCUS) has been left to the
and verbalize a check sheet is no longer acceptable and
“credentialing” process of the EMS organization and medical
should be changed. Simulation has proven to increase
director. The Standards revision team believes that the ideal
critical thinking skills and reduce medical errors in our health
time for use of these technologies is when a person has been
care system. Simple to complex simulation comes in many
educated, deemed competent, licensed and credentialed with
forms, from table-top exercises and practicing intramuscular
knowledge and skill. The local EMS medical director should be
injections on an orange to standardized live patients and
involved in the selection of technologies. Widespread education
high-fidelity manikins. Cost will vary, but simulation does not
based on specific technologies should be decided at the local
have to be expensive to be successful. Simulation in EMS
or state level. Only after national adoption and inclusion in
can achieve:
a practice analysis should technologies be included in the
National EMS Education Standards and National EMS Scope of
• The creation of a “safe-to-fail” environment in which
Practice Model.
students can make mistakes without dire consequences
and learn from those mistakes
Instructional Practices: Simulation, Shadowing &
• Higher success rates on the NREMT psychomotor
Interprofessional Education
exams
Because education standards are not intended to be a • Enhanced understanding and more robust
curriculum, the instructional strategies of simulation, shadowing therapeutic communication
and interprofessional education are addressed here but not
• Increased understanding and demonstration of
in the Standards themselves. The team does believe that an
affective domain competencies
education program should implement numerous instructional
• Improvement in critical thinking skills of entry-level
techniques to accommodate the diversity of student learning
personnel
needs inside and outside the EMS classroom. Using numerous
instructional strategies will help reach every learner. A heavy • Improved safety, effectiveness and efficiency of
reliance on the traditional lecture is not ideal and is not services
equitable, as some students learn better in different settings
• Substitution for infrequent or unattainable clinical
and every student benefits from experiencing other methods of
scenarios
instruction. Three types of instructional practices were identified
by the public and various stakeholders: simulation, shadowing
Shadowing
and interprofessional education. The team believes that each
Shadowing a practicing clinician offers students experiential,
practice has merit and should be considered as an additional
hands-on learning opportunities, and many learners have a
instructional strategy.
special affinity for it. Shadowing affords a prospective EMS
20

Back to Table of Contents >
professional the chance to be immersed in the actual job recommended that the EMS educator work with the subject
environment, making it possible to see an experienced matter experts to ensure relevance of the content to the
worker apply the skills and traits needed to accomplish practice of prehospital medicine.
the work.
Eminence of the Affective Domain
Interprofessional Education
Competence in the affective domain of learning is critical to the
Health care is best when delivered in a cooperative
success of EMRs, EMTs, AEMTs and Paramedics. The National
team environment; collaboration can result in improved
EMS Education Standards focus on the knowledge and skills
communications, thus reducing medical errors, reducing
that an entry-level practitioner needs to treat sick or injured
costs for patients and improving patient outcomes.
patients. The third dimension needed for any skilled EMS
Interprofessional Education is a proven instructional method
clinician is related to values, attitude, professional behavior,
that results in positive outcomes in clinical preparation,
compassion and a willingness to serve. Values provide the
health care profession education and public safety.
foundation for decisions, and attitudes reflect values and
Interprofessional Education helps a learner realize how
influence interpersonal dynamics. Professional behavior is a key
EMS fits into the larger “continuum of care” and plays a
component of medical practice, and compassion is a required
role in critical “systems of care.” Learning how patients
characteristic of medical professionals supporting clinical
move through the health care system, from dispatch to
knowledge and skill. A willingness to serve underlies all that a
discharge to follow-up care, plays a critical role in patient
health care provider does.
safety. Interaction with other health care providers and first
responders during initial education will mutually enhance an
The importance of affective domain competence cannot be
understanding of everyone’s roles in the system.
overstated. Every EMS education program director and faculty
member should consider this aspect of medical practice.
Out-of-hospital care is becoming more diverse and complex.
Modeling and setting professional-level expectations for
As a result, individual EMS instructors may not possess
affective domains are part of the educational duty of an educator
the expertise or knowledge to teach all subjects within the
within career and technical school. From the very first day of
revised Standards. When this occurs, a subject matter
class until course conclusion, the importance of teaching and
expert should be enlisted for the given topic. For instance,
evaluating affective domain competency to ensure graduates
the public health section has been expanded and it would
are fully prepared for professional practice should be identified
be a “best practice” to bring in a qualified content expert to
as a high priority and a universal goal.
cover the topic. Many areas related to EMS operations would
also require a qualified content expert. Rescue operations
Sequence of Instruction
have become extremely broad and specialized. Bodies of
knowledge such as incident command, hazardous materials
The order of the National EMS Education Standards does not
and other unique topics require experience and specialized
imply any particular sequence of instruction. For example,
knowledge for quality instruction. The instructor should have
some topics, such as public health, could be taught early on or
a proper background, relevant knowledge and a degree
later in a course, despite appearing early in these Standards.
or a recognized and credible credential in the topic. It is
Other topics, such as basic assessment skills, would likely
21

Back to Table of Contents >
come early in the clinician’s education and precede concepts Two critical sources that educators should consider referencing
that build upon them. Curricular flow should be determined by as they create learning content are the National Model EMS
the education program director, with input from faculty, medical Clinical Guidelines, maintained by the National Association of
direction and advisory committees. State EMS Officials (NASEMSO), and pre-hospital evidence-
based guidelines, many of which are produced through the
Locally Identified Topics efforts of The Prehospital Guidelines Consortium, maintained
by the National Association of EMS Physicians (NAEMSP). The
The revision team recognized and heard numerous comments guidance provided by these sources is a result of collaboration
regarding clinical content that is of great local need and yet may among many national EMS stakeholders intent on promoting
not be essential as an item for the entire nation. As a result, consensus and evidence to inform a general standard of
the team believed it would be best to include a statement that prehospital care.
some content should be locally determined and developed at
the simple depth, simple breadth level (or higher when desired).
This content should be identified, developed and implemented
using a program medical director, advisory boards, the larger
medical community or faculty judgement.
Implicit Expectations
For a given illness, condition, or traumatic injury, the implicit
expectation is that an educational program will include instruction
of the relevant anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, assessments
and accepted treatments. The team determined that this
expectation is known by educators and repeating the statement in
each section of the document is not required or desired.
Additional Resources
It is impossible for EMS instructors to know everything about
the profession, and trying to stay up to date on the latest
evidence-based guidelines, best practices, industry standards
and research is a very difficult task. The resources found in
Appendix A are intended as tools for educators to use as
needed to remain current on changes in the field.
22

Back to Table of Contents >
Summary of Significant Changes to the EMS Education Standards
Behavioral/Psychiatric • EMS workforce: Are we creating a diversified and
equitable workforce reflective of our population?
Many, if not most EMS systems have seen a steady rise in Promoting cultural humility can help strengthen
behavioral emergencies and patients experiencing acute and relationships among staff, leadership, patients and
chronic manifestations of psychiatric illnesses. Moreover, a families and other health care personnel we interact with
lack of available in-patient beds at mental health facilities has on a daily basis.
resulted in EMS clinicians needing to manage these patients for
• Patient care: Are we teaching cultural competency and
longer periods of time and over longer distances.
humility to our EMS students? After graduation, can our
students provide culturally competent, equitable and
As a result, the behavioral/psychiatric section of the Education
medically appropriate prehospital care to each and every
Standards was revised to include more information regarding
patient no matter their background? Cultural humility leads
acute behavioral crisis and mental health disorders. Greater
to higher-quality care and better communication and trust
depth and breadth of knowledge were recommended for
between patients and clinicians.
areas involving potential safety hazards to patients and EMS
clinicians. Conversely, certain psychiatric disease and syndrome
EMS Operations
areas were revised and simplified.
EMS operations, while extremely important, are determined by a
Cultural Humility
variety of factors, including the setting, the clinician’s role and the
EMS system design. Therefore, it is not possible to provide strict
Throughout health care and related fields, there has been a
and straightforward training requirements that would be appropriate
recognition of the importance of maintaining an awareness of the
across these diverse settings. Next is a summary of the intent of
assumptions and biases related to cultural issues and how they
each section of the EMS operations education standards. EMS
may affect our patients, co-workers and students. Cultural humility
educators and EMS institutions need to be able to work with local
is a lifelong, ongoing process of self-reflection and self-critique in
and state agencies to determine the appropriate level of knowledge
which one learns about others’ cultural identities and looks at how
that providers need to perform their duties safely and efficiently.
one’s own background and social environment have shaped the
individual. Cultural humility in EMS should address:
• Education: Are our EMS educators diverse? Does
our student population reflect the community? Are our
classrooms free of stereotypes? Do we understand our own
biases and the differences between all of our students?
23

Back to Table of Contents >
• Principles of Safely Operating EMS Emergency achieved by clinicians at each level should be determined
Response Vehicles by state and local requirements.
The intent of this section is to give an overview of
emergency response to ensure the safety of EMS • Landing Zone Operations
personnel, patients and others during EMS response The intent of this section is to give an overview of
vehicle operations. This does not prepare the entry-level operating safely in and around a landing zone during
student to be an experienced and competent driver. air medical operations and transport. The safety
considerations of setting up and operating in a landing
Appropriate driver training designed for the entry-level
zone should be taught by properly trained experts who
provider must be completed as required by state and local
have the proper knowledge and experience in the area
regulations and is not intended to be part of a requirement
of air medical transportation. The depth and breadth of
to achieve national certification as an emergency medical
information that is needed by each level of clinician should
responder. Information related to the clinical management
be determined by state and local regulations. Information
of the patient during emergency response is found in the related to the clinical management of the patient being
clinical sections of the National EMS Education Standards cared for during air medical operations is found in the
for each personnel level. clinical sections of the National EMS Education Standards
for each licensure level.
• Incident Management
• Rescue Operations
Information related to the clinical management of the
The intent of this section is to provide an overview of
patient within components of the Incident Management
rescue operations including, but not limited to, vehicle
System is found in the clinical sections of the National
extrication, low/high angle, water, trench and confined
EMS Education Standards for each licensure level. The
space to ensure the safety of EMS personnel and patients
material presented in this section should be delivered by during these events. This does not prepare the entry-level
an individual who has been trained and has the proper student to become competent or qualified to work in these
credentials to educate students in these areas. The rescue environments. Information related to the clinical
material may be obtained in-person or through distance management of the patient being cared for during rescue
incidents is found in the clinical sections of the National
learning as determined by state and local requirements.
EMS Education Standards for each personnel level.
• Mass Casualty Incidents
• Hazardous Materials
The intent of this section is to give an overview of
Information related to the clinical management of the
operating during a mass casualty incident when a multiple
patient exposed to hazardous materials is found in the
casualty incident plan is activated. Information related to
clinical sections of the National EMS Education Standards
the clinical management of the patients during a multiple
for each personnel level. This information may be done as
casualty incident is found in the clinical sections of the
a corequisite or prerequisite, or as part of the entry-level
National EMS Education Standards for each licensure
course as determined by state and local requirements.
level. The depth and breadth of training that must be
24

Back to Table of Contents >
Training in this area should only be done by those properly The EMS clinician of the future will be expected to integrate into
trained and credentialed to provide the required training. pandemic plans, assist in vaccinations and act as the initial point
Federal regulations require that, at a minimum, EMS of entry into robust community health programs.
personnel must be trained at the Hazardous Materials
Awareness level. State and local regulations may have The new standards are intended to prepare the entry-level
additional requirements that are above and beyond federal provider to work alongside and collaboratively with specially
regulations. EMS educators should work in collaboration with trained community paramedics, social workers, public health
local fire or emergency management authorities to determine organizations, health care entities, emergency management
the proper training level required and assuring that properly agencies and non-governmental organizations in their day-
credentialed instructors are providing the training. The to-day duties, and lay the foundation for advancement into
information contained in the hazardous materials awareness specialized roles.
programs are above and beyond the scope of national EMS
programs for the entry-level provider. Pharmacology
An EMS culture of safety is a universal goal within the industry.
• Mass Casualty Incidents Due to Active Threats
A key area for safety is the administration of medications in
and Disaster
the prehospital setting. The lack of desired pharmacology
The intent of this section is to give an overview of competency among EMS program graduates was identified
operating during a terrorist event or during a natural or by the EMS Scope of Practice subject matter experts, in EMS
man-made disaster. Instruction in this area should be evidenced-based literature and numerous other sources. When
done by properly trained and knowledgeable individuals in it comes to pediatric populations, EMS for Children identified
this area. State and local regulations may have additional a significant need for additional training in this area and called
requirements that are above and beyond federal for specific teaching for pediatric dosing and troubleshooting
regulations. Information related to the clinical management abnormal situations. As a result, the pharmacology section has
of patients exposed to a terrorist event or involved in a been expanded for EMR, EMT, AEMT and paramedics. It is not
disaster is found in the clinical sections of the National EMS enough to solely teach pharmacology in a traditional didactic
Education Standards for each personnel level. manner. This skill should include didactic, psychomotor and
affective instruction. There should be significant opportunities
Public Health
to practice the skill before leaving the education program.
Simulation and, ideally, actual patient encounters should
Since the release of the original National EMS Education
be offered to students. Emphasis and specific focus should be
Standards in 2009, EMS has made substantial progress from
given to psychomotor practice of adult, pediatric and geriatric
being viewed as simply a provider of medical transport to a true
medication administration due to the complexity of drug dosing
out-of-hospital health care resource. The changes to the public
and the chance of error.
health section of the Standards reflect this evolution in EMS.
Public health prevention and pandemic preparedness efforts are
essential functions in the future as EMS continues to be at the
crossroads between health care, public health and public safety.
25

Back to Table of Contents >
EMS Safety, Wellness and Resilience The need for better EMS assessment, diagnosis, treatment,
safe medication administration, airway management and
Workforce safety and wellness has been expanded to reflect appropriate pain management has been identified. In every
principles of stress management, responder mental health, aspect of education, troubleshooting and critical thinking are
resilience and suicide prevention across all levels. With greater required when clinical situations are confusing or problematic.
number of responders reporting thoughts of suicide, and suicide As students acquire knowledge, skills and abilities, opportunities
rates among first responders significantly exceeding those of to compare and contrast pediatric, adult and geriatric
the general population, a foundational level of knowledge is populations will enhance and deepen learning.
crucial to addressing this professional and occupational crisis.
An overall greater emphasis on mental health resources is also During each section of the Standards, relevant pediatric and
recommended. geriatric content should be discussed in detail as they aren’t
covered in a separate section. Incorporation of this special
Standard safety precautions, use of personal protective population information into the general content should improve
equipment, illness and injury prevention, and lifting and moving the comfort level of students by making the care of these
patients continue to be emphasized at all levels of emergency patients part of everyday operations.
responders. Other areas that have been added include
crew resource management across all levels and disease EMS education should include knowledge from the cradle to
transmission in the EMT, AEMT and paramedic curricula. the grave. Pediatric and geriatric topics should no longer be
minimized, in comparison to “adult” topics, or relegated to an
Pediatric and Geriatric Content Competencies
isolated component of an EMS course, which can create a
perception that the content is somehow less important.
Individual sections for pediatrics and geriatrics have been
removed, with education content addressing these special
EMS education and care should be family-centered. Family-
populations now incorporated throughout the education
centered care is a clinical methodology for the planning,
standards. This change is based on recommendations from
delivery and evaluation of health care which is established in
pediatric-focused stakeholders, scientific evidence and
an affirming partnership that collaboratively involves patients,
consensus among clinical partners.
families and the health care providers. Family-centered care
represents a significant transition away from paternalistic
Concepts related to geriatric and pediatric patients deserve
medicine to that which is founded on pillars of respect,
equitable attention and should be taught repeatedly throughout
collaboration, information sharing and shared decision-making.
every section of a course resulting in an earlier assimilation
of the content. Pediatric stakeholders reported that anxiety,
While family-centered care is often taught as an area of focus
unfamiliarity with pediatric patients and equipment, and
for children with special needs, it should be integrated into
discomfort on the part of rescuers calls for aggressive remedies.
the care of all patients. In the case of children with special
These findings may be associated with the low frequency and
health care needs, the family’s knowledge of a child’s condition
high acuity of pediatric encounters.
can be immensely valuable. Yet, even among children with
26

Back to Table of Contents >
simple, acute medical emergencies, families and children
often experience high levels of stress. Family-centered care
seeks to help patients and families retain a sense of control.
This includes providing opportunities for family members to
be present during medical transport and invasive procedures.
The approach recognizes that each family is unique, integral
and essential for health care safety and quality. The values of
collaboration, responsiveness and united decision-making are at
the forefront of treatment. The beliefs, desires, and values from
cultural backgrounds of the family and patient are considered
and respected. Health care workers communicate with complete
information and in an unbiased and respectful manner. When
choices are made, decision-making involves all parties as
coequal parts and decision-makers are known and informed,
and health care clinicians listen to and honor patient and family
choices. When family-centered care is optimal, there is high-
quality care with safety, and family and patient satisfaction are
achieved.
The reader will find phrases such as “include age-related
variations in pediatric and geriatric patients” and “include
psychosocial aspects of age-related assessment and
treatment modifications for the major or common diseases
and/or emergencies associated with pediatric and geriatric
patients.” These phrases are intended to remind and direct EMS
educators to elevate the importance of geriatric and pediatric
education within each section.
27

Back to Table of Contents >
National EMS Education Standards
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Preparatory Uses knowledge of the EMS Applies knowledge of the EMS Applies knowledge of the EMS Integrates knowledge of EMS
system, safety/well-being of system, safety/well-being of system, safety/well-being of systems, the safety/well-being
the EMR, medical/legal issues the EMT, medical/legal and the AEMT, medical/legal and of the paramedic, and medical/
and ethical issues at the scene ethical issues to the provision ethical issues to the provision legal and ethical issues intended
of an emergency while awaiting of emergency care. of emergency care. to improve the health of EMS
a higher level of care. personnel, patients and the
community.
EMS Systems • EMS systems (S,S) • EMS systems (S,F) • EMS systems (S,F) • EMS systems (C,C)
• Roles, responsibilities and • Roles, responsibilities and • Roles, responsibilities and • Roles, responsibilities, and
professionalism of EMS professionalism of EMS professionalism of EMS professionalism of EMS
personnel (S,S) personnel (F,F) personnel (F,F) personnel (C,C)
• Quality improvement vs. quality • Quality improvement vs. quality • Quality improvement vs. quality • Quality improvement vs. quality
assurance (S,S) assurance (S,F) assurance (F,F) assurance (C,C)
• Role of medical oversight (S,S) • Role of medical oversight (S,S) • Role of medical oversight (F,F) • Role of medical oversight (C,C)
• Culture of safety / patient safety • Culture of safety / patient safety • Culture of safety / patient • Culture or safety / patient
(S,S) (S,F) safety (F,F) safety (C,C)
• Continuum of care (S,S) • Continuum of care (S,F) • Continuum of care (F,F) • Continuum of care (F,F)
• History of EMS (S,F) • History of EMS (S,F) • History of EMS (F,F)
• Systems of care, e.g., Stroke, • Systems of care, e.g., Stroke, • Systems of care, e.g., Stroke,
STEMI, Trauma, Pediatrics STEMI, Trauma, Pediatrics STEMI, Trauma, Pediatrics
(S,F) (F,F) (C,C)
• MIH/CP and other EMS-related • MIH/CP and other EMS-related • MIH/CP and other EMS-related
specialty roles (S,S) specialty roles (F,F) specialty roles (F,F)
28
yrotaraperP
LEGEND
The first letter refers to Breadth, which can be:
• Simple (S)
• Foundational (F)
• Comprehensive (C)
The second letter refers to Depth, which can be:
• Simple (S)
• Fundamental (F)
• Complex (C)
For more information refer to Fig. 2 and Fig. 2.1 (Depth/Breadth
Terminology) on p.11-12.

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Workforce • Standard safety precautions • Standard safety precautions • Standard safety precautions • Standard safety precautions
(S,S) (F,F) (F,F) (C,C)
Safety and
• Personal protective equipment • Personal protective equipment • Personal protective equipment • Personal protective equipment
Wellness (S,S) (F,F) (F,F) (C,C)
• Lifting and moving patients • Lifting and moving patients (F,F) • Lifting and moving patients (F,F) • Lifting and moving patients (C,C)
(S,S)
• Crew resource management • Crew resource management • Crew resource management
• Crew resource management (F,F) (F,F) (F,F)
(S,S)
• Stress management (F,F) • Stress management (F,F) • Stress management (C,C)
• Stress management (F,F)
• Prevention of work-related • Prevention of work-related • Prevention of work-related
• Prevention of work-related injuries and illnesses (F,F) injuries and illnesses (F,F) injuries and illnesses (C,C)
injuries and illnesses (F,F)
• Responder mental health, • Responder mental health, • Responder mental health,
• Responder mental health, resilience and suicide resilience and suicide resilience and suicide prevention
resilience and suicide prevention (F,F) prevention (F,F) (C,C)
prevention (F,F)
• Wellness principles (F,F) • Wellness principles (F,F) • Wellness principles (C,C)
• Wellness principles (F,F)
• Disease transmission (F,F) • Disease transmission (F,F) • Disease transmission (C,C)
• Disease transmission (S,S)
Research • Impact of research on EMR • Impact of research on EMT care • Impact of research on AEMT • Impact of research on
care (S,S) (S,S) care (S,S) Paramedic care (S,S)
• Data collection (S,S) • Data collection (S,S) • Data collection (S,S) • Data collection (S,S)
• Evidence-based decision • Evidence-based decision • Evidence-based decision making
making (S,S) making (S,S) (S,S)
• Research principles to interpret
literature and advocate
evidence-based practice (F,F)
Documentation • Recording patient findings (S,S) • Recording patient findings (S,S) • Recording patient findings (S,S) • Recording patient findings (S,S)
• Principles of medical • Principles of medical • Principles of medical documentation
documentation and report writing documentation and report writing and report writing (C,C)
(F,F) (C,F)
• Supporting medical necessity (S,S)
• Supporting medical necessity (S,S) • Supporting medical necessity (S,S)
EMS System • Call for resources (S,S) • EMS communication system • EMS communication system • EMS communication system
(S,S) (F,F) (C,C)
Communication • Transfer care of the patient
(S,S) • Communication with other • Communication with other • Communication with other health
health care professionals to health care professionals to care professionals to include
• Interact within the team
include cohesive and organized include cohesive and organized cohesive and organized patient
structure (S,S)
patient handoff (S,S) patient handoff (F,F) handoff (C,C)
• Team communication and • Team communication and • Team communication and
dynamics (S,S) dynamics (F,F) dynamics (C,C)
• Telemetric monitoring devices • Telemetric monitoring devices • Telemetric monitoring devices
and transmission of clinical and transmission of clinical and transmission of clinical data,
data, including video data (S,S) data, including video data (S,S) including video data (S,S)
29
yrotaraperP

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Therapeutic • Health care literacy (S,S) • Health care literacy (S,S) • Health care literacy (F,F) • Health care literacy (C,C)
Communication • Interviewing techniques (S,S) • Interviewing techniques (F,F) • Interviewing techniques (F,F) • Interviewing techniques
(C,C)
• Verbal defusing strategies (S,S) • Verbal defusing strategies (F,F) • Verbal defusing strategies (F,F)
• Verbal defusing strategies
• Managing communication • Managing communication • Managing communication
(F,F)
challenges (S,S) challenges (F,F) challenges (F,F)
• Managing communication
• Family centered care (S,S) • Family centered care (F,F) • Family centered care (F,F)
challenges (C,C)
• Adjusting communication • Adjusting communication
• Family centered care (F,F)
strategies for age, stage of strategies for age, stage of
development, patients with development, patients with • Adjusting communication
special needs (S,S) special needs (S,S) strategies for age, stage of
development, patients with
• Non-discriminatory • Non-discriminatory
special needs (C,C)
communication that addresses communication that addresses
inherent or unconscious bias, is inherent or unconscious bias, is • Non-discriminatory
culturally aware and sensitive, culturally aware and sensitive, communication that
and intended to improve patient and intended to improve patient addresses inherent or
outcome (S,S) outcome (S,S) unconscious bias, is culturally
aware and sensitive, and
intended to improve patient
outcome (C,C)
Medical/Legal • Consent/refusal of care (S,S) • Consent/involuntary consent/ • Consent/involuntary consent/ • Consent/involuntary
refusal of care (F,F) refusal of care (F,F) consent/ refusal of care
and Ethics • Confidentiality (S,S)
(C,C)
• Confidentiality (F,F) • Confidentiality (F,F)
• Advanced directives (S,S)
• Confidentiality (C,C)
• Advanced directives (F,F) • Advanced directives (F,F)
• Tort and criminal actions (S,S)
• Advanced directives (C,C)
• Tort and criminal actions (F,F) • Tort and criminal actions (F,F)
• Evidence preservation (S,S)
• Tort and criminal actions
• Evidence preservation (F,F) • Evidence preservation (F,F)
• Statutory responsibilities (S,S) (C,C)
• Statutory responsibilities (F,F) • Statutory responsibilities (F,F)
• Mandatory reporting (S,S) • Evidence preservation (F,F)
• Mandatory reporting (F,F) • Mandatory reporting (F,F)
• Ethical principles/moral • Statutory responsibilities
obligations (S,S) • Ethical principles/moral • Ethical principles/moral (C,C)
obligations (F,F) obligations (F,F)
• End-of-life issues (S,S) • Mandatory reporting (C,C)
• End-of-life issues (S,S) • End-of-life issues (S,S)
• Ethical principles/moral
• Patient rights/advocacy (S,S) • Patient rights/advocacy (S,S) obligations (C,C)
• End-of-life issues (C,C)
• Health care regulation (C,C)
• Patient rights/advocacy
(C,C)
• Ethical tests and decision
making (C,C)
30
yrotaraperP

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Anatomy and Uses knowledge of the anatomy Applies knowledge of the Integrates knowledge of the Integrates knowledge of the
and function of the upper airway, anatomy and function of all anatomy and physiology of anatomy and physiology of all
Physiology
heart, vessels, blood, lungs, human systems to the practice of the airway, respiratory and human systems
skin, muscles and bones as the EMS. circulatory systems to the
foundation of emergency care. practice of EMS.
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Medical Uses medical and anatomical Uses anatomical and medical Same as EMT Level Integrates anatomical and
terms. terms and abbreviations in medical terminology and
Terminology
written and oral communication abbreviations into written
with colleagues and other health and oral communication with
care professionals. colleagues and other health care
professionals.
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Pathophysiology Uses knowledge of shock and Applies knowledge of the Applies knowledge of the Integrates knowledge of
respiratory compromise to pathophysiology of respiration pathophysiology of respiration pathophysiology of major human
respond to life threats. and perfusion to patient and perfusion to patient systems.
assessment and management. assessment and management.
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Life Span Uses knowledge of age-related Applies knowledge of life Same as EMT Level Integrates knowledge of life span
differences to assess and care span development to patient development.
Development
for patients. assessment and management.
31

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Public Has an awareness of local Applies knowledge of the Same as EMT level Applies knowledge of
public health resources and principles of public health principles of public health and
Health
their role in public health. epidemiology including public epidemiology including public
health emergencies, public health emergencies, health
health monitoring, health promotion and illness and
promotion and illness and injury prevention.
injury prevention.
Public • EMS roles in public health • EMS roles in public health • EMS roles in public health • EMS roles in public health
(S,S) (S,S) (S,S) (C,F)
Health
• Infection prevention and • Infection prevention and • Infection prevention and • Infection prevention and
Overview control (S,S) control (S,S) control (S,S) control (F,F)
• Human trafficking (S,S) • Human trafficking (S,S) • Human trafficking (S,S) • Human trafficking (S,S)
• EMS EHR reporting and data • EMS EHR reporting and data • EMS EHR reporting and data
collection (S,S) collection (S,S) collection (S,S)
• Governmental/ • Governmental/ • Governmental/
nongovernmental roles & nongovernmental roles & nongovernmental roles &
resources (S,S) resources (S,S) resources (S,S)
• Public health mission and • Public health mission and • Public health mission and
goals (S,S) goals (S,S) goals (S,S)
• Social, geographic, economic, • Social, geographic, economic, • Social, geographic, economic,
demographic determinants of demographic determinants of demographic determinants of
health (S,S) health (S,S) health (S,S)
• Patient and community • Patient and community • Patient and community
education (S,S) education (S,S) education (S,S)
• Injury prevention and wellness • Injury prevention and wellness • Injury prevention and wellness
(S,S) (S,S) (S,S)
• Unique pediatric, geriatric and • Unique pediatric, geriatric and • Unique pediatric, geriatric and
special populations public special populations public special populations public
health concerns (S,S) health concerns (S,S) health concerns (S,S)
• Screenings and vaccinations/ • Screenings and vaccinations/ • Screenings and vaccinations/
immunizations (S,S) immunizations (F,F) immunizations (C,F)
• Impacts of political, social and • Impacts of political, social and
economic issues (F,F) economic issues (F,F)
• Infectious disease (F,F) • Infectious disease (C,F)
• Patient disposition, selecting
destination, ambulance
transport (C,F)
• Bioinformatics (C,F)
32
htlaeH
cilbuP

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Pharmacology Uses knowledge of the Applies knowledge of the Applies (to patient assessment Integrates knowledge of
medications that the EMR may medications the EMT may and management) knowledge pharmacology to formulate
administer in an emergency. administer to a patient during of the medications carried a treatment plan intended to
an emergency and chronic or by AEMTs that may be mitigate emergencies and
maintenance medications the administered to a patient improve the overall health of
patient may be taking. during an emergency and the patient.
chronic or maintenance
medications the patient may
be taking.
Principles of • Medication safety (S,S) • Medication safety (F,F) • Medication safety (C,C) • Medication safety (C,C)
Pharmacology • Kinds of medications used • Medication legislation (F,F) • Medication legislation (C,C) • Medication legislation (C,C)
during an emergency (S,S)
• Naming (F,F) • Naming (C,C) • Naming (C,C)
• Classifications (F,F) • Classifications (C,C) • Classifications (C,C)
• Storage and security (F,F) • Storage and security (C,C) • Storage and security (C,C)
• Medication interactions (S,S) • Medication interactions (C,C) • Medication interactions (C,C)
• Adverse drug reactions (S,S) • Adverse drug reactions (C,C) • Adverse drug reactions (C,C)
• Metabolism and excretion (F,F) • Pharmacokinetics (C,C) • Pharmacokinetics (C,C)
• Mechanism of action (F,F) • Pharmacodynamics (C,C) • Pharmacodynamics (C,C)
• Medication response • Schedules (C,C) • Schedules (C,C)
relationships (F,F)
Medication • Use a Medication Cross Check • Use a Medication Cross Check • Use a Medication Cross Check • Use a Medication Cross
procedure (S,S) procedure (F,F) procedure (F,F) Check procedure (F,F)
Administration
• Use an autoinjector (S,S) • Use an autoinjector (S,S) • Use an autoinjector (S,S) • Use an autoinjector (S,S)
• Use a unit-dose, premeasured • Use a unit-dose, premeasured • Use a unit-dose, premeasured • Use a unit-dose, premeasured
intranasal device (S,S) intranasal device (S,S) intranasal device (S,S) intranasal device (S,S)
• Use of tools/resources to • Administer medications to a • Administer medications to a • Administer medications to a
facilitate safe administration of patient (F,F) patient (C,C) patient (C,C)
weight-based dosing.
• Provide pain management, • Provide pain management, • Provide pain management,
including ethical and safety including ethical and safety including ethical and safety
considerations (F,F) considerations (C,C) considerations (C,C)
• Routes of administration (S,S) • Routes of administration (C,C) • Routes of administration
(C,C)
• Resources for safe
administration of weight-based • Resources for safe
dosing (F,F) administration of weight-
based dosing (F,F)
33
ygolocamrahP

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Acute • Names (S,S) • Names (F,S) • Names (C,C) • Names (C,C)
Medications • Effects (S,S) • Effects (S,S) • Effects (C,C) • Effects (C,C)
• Indications (S,S) • Indications (F,S) • Indications (C,C) • Indications (C,C)
• Contraindications (S,S) • Contraindications (F,S) • Contraindications (C,C) • Contraindications (C,C)
• Side effects (S,S) • Side effects (F,S) • Side effects (C,C) • Side effects (C,C)
• Routes of administration (S,S) • Routes of administration (F,S) • Routes of administration (C,C) • Routes of administration (C,C)
• Dosages (S,S) • Dosages (F,S) • Dosages (C,C) • Dosages (C,C)
• Actions (F,S) • Actions (C,C) • Actions (C,C)
• Complications (F,S) • Complications (C,C) • Complications (C,C)
• Interactions (F,S) • Interactions (C,C) • Interactions (C,C)
Chronic or No knowledge related to this Specific medication classes to be Specific medication classes to be Specific medication classes
competency is applicable at determined locally determined locally and examples to be determined
Maintenance
this level. • Class names (S,S) • Class names (S,S) locally
Medications
• Class indications (S,S) • Class indications (S,S) • Class names (F,S)
• Class complications (S,S) • Class complications (S,S) • Class indications (F,S)
• Class side effects (S,S) • Class side effects (S,S) • Class complications (F,S)
• Polypharmacy (S,S) • Polypharmacy (S,S) • Class side effects (F,S)
• Polypharmacy (F,S)
34
ygolocamrahP

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Airway Applies knowledge of anatomy Applies knowledge of anatomy Applies knowledge of upper Integrates knowledge of anatomy,
and physiology to assure and physiology to patient airway anatomy and physiology physiology and pathophysiology
Management,
a patent airway, adequate assessment and management in to patient assessment and into the assessment to develop
Respiration mechanical ventilation and order to assure a patent airway, management in order to assure and implement a treatment plan
and respiration while awaiting adequate mechanical ventilation a patent airway, adequate with the goal of assuring a patent
additional EMS response for and respiration for patients of mechanical ventilation and airway, adequate mechanical
Ventilation
patients of all ages. all ages. respiration for patients of all ventilation and respiration for
ages. patients of all ages.
Airway • Airway anatomy (F,S) • Airway anatomy (F,F) • Airway anatomy (F,F) • Airway anatomy (C,C)
Management • Airway assessment (F,S) • Airway assessment (F,F) • Airway assessment (F,F) • Airway assessment (C,C)
• Techniques of assuring a patent • Techniques of assuring a patent • Techniques of assuring a patent • Techniques of assuring a patent
(Include age- airway (F,S) airway (F,F) airway (F,F) airway (C,C)
related variations
in pediatric and
geriatric patients)
Respiration • Anatomy of the respiratory • Anatomy of the respiratory • Anatomy of the respiratory • Anatomy of the respiratory
system (F,S) system (F,F) system (C,F) system (C,C)
(Include age- • Physiology and pathophysiology • Physiology and pathophysiology • Physiology and pathophysiology • Physiology and pathophysiology
related variations of respiration (F,S) of respiration (F,C) of respiration (F,C) of respiration (C,C)
in pediatric and - Pulmonary ventilation - Pulmonary ventilation - Pulmonary ventilation - Pulmonary ventilation
geriatric patients)
- Oxygenation - Oxygenation - Oxygenation - Oxygenation
- Respiration - Respiration - Respiration - Respiration
• External • External • External • External
• Internal • Internal • Internal • Internal
• Cellular • Cellular • Cellular • Cellular
• Assessment and management • Assessment and management • Assessment and management • Assessment and management
of adequate and inadequate of adequate and inadequate of adequate and inadequate of adequate and inadequate
respiration (F,S) respiration (F,C) respiration (F,C) respiration (C,C)
• Supplemental oxygen therapy • Supplemental oxygen therapy • Supplemental oxygen therapy • Supplemental oxygen therapy
(F,S) (F,C) (F,C) (C,C)
Ventilation • Assessment and management • Assessment and management • Assessment and management • Assessment and management
of adequate and inadequate of adequate and inadequate of adequate and inadequate of adequate and inadequate
ventilation (F,S) ventilation (F,F) ventilation (C,F) ventilation (C,C)
(Include age-
related variations • Effect of ventilation on cardiac • Effect of ventilation on cardiac • Effect of ventilation on cardiac • Effect of ventilation on cardiac
in pediatric and output (F,S) output (F,F) output (C,F) output (C,C)
geriatric patients)
35
noitalitneV
dna
noitaripseR
,tnemeganaM
yawriA

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Assessment Use scene information and Applies scene information and Same as EMT Level Integrate scene and patient
patient assessment findings patient assessment findings assessment findings with
to identify and manage (scene size up, primary and knowledge of epidemiology
immediate life threats and secondary assessment, patient and pathophysiology to
injuries within the scope of history and reassessment) to form a field impression. This
practice of the EMR. guide emergency management. includes developing a list of
differential diagnoses through
clinical reasoning to modify the
assessment and formulate a
treatment plan.
Scene • Scene safety/situational • Scene safety/situational • Scene safety/situational • Scene safety/situational
awareness (C,C) awareness (C,C) awareness (C,C) awareness (C,C)
Assessment
• Scene management (F,F) • Scene management (F,F) • Scene management (F,F) • Scene management (C,C)
• Impact of the environment on • Impact of the environment on • Impact of the environment on • Impact of the environment on
patient care (F,F) patient care (F,F) patient care (F,F) patient care (C,C)
• Addressing hazards (F,F) • Addressing hazards (F,F) • Addressing hazards (F,F) • Addressing hazards (C,C)
• Violence (F,F) • Violence (F,F) • Violence (F,F) • Violence (C,C)
• Need for additional or • Need for additional or • Need for additional or • Need for additional or
specialized resources (F,F) specialized resources (F,F) specialized resources (F,F) specialized resources (F,F)
• Standard precautions (F,F) • Standard precautions (F,F) • Standard precautions (F,F) • Standard precautions (F,F)
• Multiple patient situations (F,F) • Multiple patient situations (F,F) • Multiple patient situations (F,F) • Multiple patient situations (C,C)
Primary • Primary assessment (S,S) • Primary assessment (F,S) • Primary assessment (F,F) • Primary assessment (C,C)
Assessment • Begin interventions needed to • Integration of treatment/ • Integration of treatment/ • Integration of treatment/
preserve life (S,S) procedures needed to preserve procedures needed to preserve procedures needed to preserve
life (F,S) life (F,F) life (C,C)
(Include
age-related
variations
in pediatric
and geriatric
patients)
36
tnemssessA

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
History Taking • Determining the chief • Investigation of the chief • Investigation of the chief • Investigation of the chief complaint
complaint (S,S) complaint (F,F) complaint (F,F) (C,C)
(Include • Mechanism of injury/ • Mechanism of injury/nature of • Mechanism of injury/nature of • Mechanism of injury/nature of illness
age-related nature of illness (S,S) illness (F,F) illness (F,F) (C,C)
variations • Associated signs and • Associated signs and • Associated signs and • Associated signs and symptoms
in pediatric symptoms (S,S) symptoms (F,F) symptoms (F,F) (C,C)
and geriatric • Past medical history (F,F) • Past medical history (F,F) • Past medical history (C,C)
patients)
• Pertinent negatives (F,F) • Pertinent negatives (F,F) • Pertinent negatives (C,C)
• Interviewing techniques (C,C)
• Therapeutic communication and
adaptive interview techniques (C,C)
Secondary • Assessment of vital • Assessment of vital signs (F,F) • Assessment of vital signs (C,F) • Assessment of vital signs (C,C)
signs (S,S)
Assessment • Assessment of pain (F,F) • Assessment of pain (C,F) • Assessment of pain (C,C)
• Assessment of pain
• Techniques of physical • Techniques of physical • Techniques of physical examination
(S,S)
(Include examination (F,F) examination (C,F) (C,C)
age-related • Performing a rapid full - Respiratory system - Respiratory system - Respiratory system including
body scan (S,S)
variations including breath sound including breath sound breath sound quality
in pediatric quality quality
- Cardiovascular system
and geriatric - Cardiovascular system - Cardiovascular system
- Neurological system
patients)
- Neurological system - Neurological system
- Musculoskeletal system
- Musculoskeletal system - Musculoskeletal system
- Major anatomical regions
- Major anatomical regions - Major anatomical regions
Monitoring No knowledge related • Pulse oximetry (S,S) • Pulse oximetry (S,S) • Pulse oximetry (S,S)
Devices to this competency is • Non-invasive blood pressure • Non-invasive blood pressure • Non-invasive blood pressure (S,S)
applicable at this level. (S,S) (S,S)
• Cardiac monitoring – 12 lead ECG
• Cardiac monitoring – 12 • Cardiac monitoring – 12 acquisition and transmission (F,F)
lead ECG acquisition and lead ECG acquisition and
• Blood glucose determination (S,S)
transmission (S,S) transmission (S,S)
• End tidal CO monitoring and
• Blood glucose determination • Blood glucose determination 2
interpretation of waveform
(S,S) (S,S)
capnography (F,F)
• End tidal CO monitoring and
2 • Venous blood sampling (S,S)
interpretation of waveform
capnography (S,S) • 12-lead ECG interpretation (F,F)
• Venous blood sampling (S,S) • Blood chemistry analysis (F,F)
Reassessment • How and when to • How and when to reassess • How and when to reassess • How and when to reassess patients
reassess patients (S,S) patients (F,F) patients (F,F) (C,C)
(Include age-
related variations
in pediatric and
geriatric patients)
37
tnemssessA

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Medicine Recognizes and manages life Applies knowledge to provide Applies knowledge to Integrates assessment findings
threats based on assessment basic emergency care and provide basic and selected with principles of epidemiology
findings of a patient with a transportation based on advanced emergency care and pathophysiology to
medical emergency while assessment findings for an and transportation based on formulate a field impression
awaiting additional emergency acutely ill patient. assessment findings for an and implement a treatment/
response. acutely ill patient. disposition plan for a patient
with a medical complaint.
Medical Overview • Assessment and management • Pathophysiology, assessment, • Pathophysiology, assessment, • Pathophysiology, assessment,
of a medical complaint (S,S) and management of a medical and management of a medical and management of a medical
complaints to include (S,F) complaints to include (F,F) complaints to include (C,C)
(Include
psychosocial - Transport mode - Transport mode - Transport mode
aspects of age- - Destination decisions - Destination decisions - Destination decisions
related assessment
and treatment
modifications for the
major or common
diseases and/
or emergencies
associated with
pediatric and
geriatric patients)
Abdominal and • Anatomy, presentations • Acute and chronic • Acute and chronic • Acute and chronic
and management of shock gastrointestinal hemorrhage (F,F) gastrointestinal hemorrhage (F,F) gastrointestinal hemorrhage
Gastrointestinal
associated with gastrointestinal (C,C)
• Other gastrointestinal disorders • Other gastrointestinal disorders
Disorders bleeding (S,S) to be determined locally (S,S) to be determined locally (S,S) • Bowel obstruction (C,C)
• Liver and biliary tract disorders
(Include (F,F)
psychosocial
• Pancreatitis (S,S)
aspects of age-
related assessment • Inflammatory disorders (S,S)
and treatment • Peritonitis (S,S)
modifications for the • Other gastrointestinal disorders
major or common to be determined locally (S,S)
diseases and/
or emergencies
associated with
pediatric and
geriatric patients)
38
enicideM

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Cardiovascular • Chest pain (S,S) • Acute coronary syndrome • Acute coronary syndrome • Acute coronary syndrome (C,C)
(F,F) (C,F)
• Hypertensive emergencies (C,C)
(Include • Hypertensive emergencies • Hypertensive emergencies
• Aortic aneurysm/dissection (F,F)
psychosocial (S,S) (F,S)
aspects of age- • Aortic aneurysm/dissection • Aortic aneurysm/dissection • Thromboembolism (F,F)
related assessment (F,F) (F,F) • Heart failure (C,C)
and treatment • Thromboembolism (F,F) • Thromboembolism (F,F) • Non-traumatic cardiac
modifications for the tamponade (C,C)
• Heart failure (F,F) • Heart failure (F,F)
major or common
• Cardiogenic shock (C,C)
diseases and/ • Other cardiovascular disorders • Other cardiovascular disorders
to be determined locally (S,S) to be determined locally (S,S) • Vascular disorders (C,C)
or emergencies
associated with • Cardiac rhythms (C,C)
pediatric and • Conditions that predispose
geriatric patients) patients to cardiac rhythm
disturbances including WPW,
Brugada, long QT syndrome
and others (C,C)
• Infectious diseases of the
heart: endocarditis, myocarditis,
pericarditis (F,F)
• Congenital heart disease (F,F)
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(F,F)
• Other cardiovascular disorders
to be determined locally (S,S)
Disorders of the • Epistaxis (S,S) • Epistaxis (S,S) • Epistaxis (F,F) • Epistaxis (F,F)
Eyes, Ears, Nose, • Other eye, ear, nose and • Post-surgical oropharyngeal • Post-surgical oropharyngeal
throat disorders to be hemorrhage (F,F) hemorrhage (F,F)
and Throat determined locally (S,S)
• Other eye, ear, nose and • Common or major diseases of
throat disorders to be the eyes, ears, nose and throat
(Include determined locally (S,S) (F,F)
psychosocial
• Other eye, ear, nose and throat
aspects of age-
disorders to be determined
related assessment locally (S,S)
and treatment
modifications for the
major or common
diseases and/
or emergencies
associated with
pediatric and
geriatric patients)
39
enicideM

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Endocrine Disorders • Awareness that diabetic • Diabetic emergencies (F,F) • Diabetic emergencies (C,F) • Diabetic emergencies (C,C)
emergencies cause altered
• Other endocrine disorders to be • Other endocrine disorders to be • Chronic diabetes (C,C)
mental status (S,S)
(Include psychosocial determined locally (S,S) determined locally (S,S)
• Adrenal disease (S,S)
aspects of age-related
assessment and • Pituitary and thyroid disorders
(S,S)
treatment modifications
for the major or • Inborn errors of metabolism
(S,S)
common diseases
and/or emergencies • Other endocrine disorders to
associated with be determined locally (S,S)
pediatric and geriatric
patients)
Genitourinary/Renal • Blood pressure assessment in • Complications related to renal • Complications related to renal • Complications of dialysis (C,C)
hemodialysis patients (S,S) dialysis (S,S) dialysis (F,S)
• Complications related to urinary
(Include psychosocial • Complications related to urinary • Complications related to urinary catheter management (not
aspects of age-related catheter management (not catheter management (not insertion) (S,S)
assessment and insertion) (S,S) insertion) (S,S) • Renal calculi (C,C)
treatment modifications • Kidney stones (S,S) • Kidney stones (F,S)
• Sexual assault (Female and
for the major or • Sexual assault (Female and • Sexual assault (Female and Male) (C,C)
common diseases Male) (F,F) Male) (F,F)
• Acute/chronic renal failure (C,C)
and/or emergencies
• Other GI/Renal to be • Other GI/Renal to be
associated with determined locally (S,S) determined locally (S,S) • Acid base disturbances (C,C)
pediatric and geriatric • Fluid and electrolytes (C,C)
patients) • Infection (F,F)
• Male genital tract conditions
(F,F)
• Other GI/Renal to be
determined locally (S,S)
Hematology No knowledge related to this • Sickle cell crisis (S,S) • Sickle cell crisis (F,F) • Sickle cell disease (C,C)
competency is applicable at this • Clotting disorders (S,S) • Clotting disorders (S,S) • Coagulopathies (F,F)
(Include psychosocial level.
• Other hematologic disorders to • Other hematologic disorders to • Blood transfusion complications
aspects of age-related
be determined locally (S,S) be determined locally (S,S) (F,F)
assessment and
• Hemostatic disorders (F,F)
treatment modifications
for the major or • Red blood cell disorders (F,F)
common diseases • White blood cell disorders (F,F)
and/or emergencies
• Other hematologic disorders to
associated with be determined locally (S,S)
pediatric and geriatric
patients)
40
enicideM

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Immunology • Anaphylactic reactions (S,S) • Allergic and anaphylactic • Allergic and anaphylactic • Allergic and anaphylactic
reactions (F,F) reactions (C,C) reactions (C,C)
(Include • Other immunological • Systemic Inflammatory • Systemic Inflammatory
psychosocial disorders to be determined Response Syndrome (SIRS) Response Syndrome (SIRS)
aspects of age- locally (S,S) (C,C) (C,C)
related assessment • Other immunological • Hypersensitivity (C,C)
and treatment disorders to be determined • Anaphylactoid reactions (C,C)
locally (S,S)
modifications for the
• Collagen vascular disease
major or common
(F,F)
diseases and/
• Transplant-related problems
or emergencies
(F,F)
associated with
• Immunodeficiency syndromes
pediatric and
(acquired or congenital) (F,F)
geriatric patients)
• Other immunological disorders
to be determined locally (S,S)
Infectious • Awareness of patient who • Assessment and • Assessment and • Assessment and management
may have an infectious management of a patient management of a patient of a patient who may have an
Diseases
disease (S,S) who may have an infectious who may have an infectious infectious disease (S,S)
disease (S,S) disease (S,S)
• How to disinfect and • How to decontaminate the
(Include
decontaminate equipment • How to decontaminate the • How to decontaminate the ambulance and equipment
psychosocial after treating a patient (S,S) ambulance and equipment ambulance and equipment after treating a patient (S,S)
aspects of age- after treating a patient (S,S) after treating a patient (S,S)
• Sepsis and septic shock (C,C)
related assessment
• Sepsis and septic shock (S,S) • Sepsis and septic shock (F,F)
• HIV-related disease (C,C)
and treatment
• Other infectious diseases to • HIV (F,F)
modifications for the • Hepatitis (C,C)
be determined locally (S,S)
major or common • Hepatitis B (F,F) • Meningitis (C,C)
diseases and/ • Antibiotic resistance (F,F)
• Antibiotic resistance (F,F)
or emergencies
• Current infectious diseases
• Current infectious diseases
associated with prevalent in the community
prevalent in the community
pediatric and (F,F)
(F,F)
geriatric patients) • Vaccine-preventable diseases
• Vaccine-preventable diseases
(F,F)
(C,C)
• Other infectious diseases to
• Viral diseases: RSV, Herpes
be determined locally (S,S)
zoster (F,F)
• Sexually transmitted infections
(F,F)
• Tetanus (S,S)
• Vector-borne diseases (S,S)
• Tuberculosis (S,S)
• Emerging infectious disease
(S,S)
• Other infectious diseases to be
determined locally (S,S)
41
enicideM

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Neurology • Decreased level of • Decreased level of • Decreased level of • Decreased level of
responsiveness (S,S) responsiveness (S,S) responsiveness (F,F) responsiveness (C,C)
(Include • Seizure (S,S) • Seizure (F,F) • Seizure (C,F) • Seizure (C,C)
psychosocial
• Stroke (S,S) • Stroke (F,F) • Stroke (F,F) • Stroke (C,C)
aspects of age-
• Dementia vs. delirium (S,S) • Dementia vs. delirium (S,S) • Dementia vs. delirium (S,S)
related assessment
and treatment • Alzheimer’s disease (S,S) • Alzheimer’s disease (S,S) • Alzheimer’s disease (S,S)
modifications for the • Headache (F,F) • Headache (F,F) • Headache (C,C)
major or common
• Brief Resolved Unexplained • Brief Resolved Unexplained • Brief Resolved Unexplained
diseases and/ Event (BRUE) (F,F) Event (BRUE) (F,F) Event (BRUE) (F,F)
or emergencies
• Other neurological disorders • Parkinson’s disease (S,S) • Parkinson’s disease (S,S)
associated with to be determined locally (S,S)
• Other neurological disorders • Hydrocephalus – CSF
pediatric and
to be determined locally (S,S) diversion devices or shunts
geriatric patients)
(F,F)
• Other neurological disorders
to be determined locally (S,S)
Non-Traumatic • Non-traumatic fractures (S,S) • Non-traumatic fractures (F,F) • Non-traumatic fractures (F,F) • Non-traumatic fractures (F,F)
Musculoskeletal • Other non-traumatic • Other non-traumatic • Disorders of the spine (F,F)
musculoskeletal disorders to musculoskeletal disorders to
Disorders be determined locally (S,S) be determined locally (S,S) • Joint abnormalities (F,F)
• Muscle abnormalities (F,F)
(Include • Overuse syndromes (F,F)
psychosocial
• Rhabdomyolysis (F,F)
aspects of age-
related assessment • Other non-traumatic
musculoskeletal disorders to
and treatment
be determined locally (S,S)
modifications for the
major or common
diseases and/
or emergencies
associated with
pediatric and
geriatric patients)
42
enicideM

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Psychiatric or • Recognition of behaviors • Basic principles of the mental • Basic principles of the mental • Basic principles of the mental
that pose a risk to the EMR, health system (S,S) health system (S,S) health system (S,S)
Behavioral
patient or others
• Patterns of violence, abuse • Patterns of violence, abuse • Patterns of violence, abuse
Emergencies • Recognition of suicide risk and neglect (S,S) and neglect (F,F) and neglect (C,C)
• Acute psychosis (F,F) • Acute psychosis (F,F) • Suicide ideation (C,C)
(Include
psychosocial • Suicide ideation (F,F) • Suicide ideation (C,C) • Excited delirium (C,C)
aspects of age- • Excited delirium (F,F) • Excited delirium (F,F) • Anxiety (C,C)
related assessment
• Anxiety (F,F) • Anxiety (F,F) • Depression (C,C)
and treatment
modifications for the • Depression (F,F) • Depression (F,F) • Medical fear (F,F)
major or common • Medical fear (F,F) • Medical fear (F,F) • Substance use disorder/
diseases and/ addictive behavior (C,C)
• Substance use disorder (F,F) • Substance use disorder/
or emergencies
addictive behavior (C,C) • PTSD (C,C)
associated with • PTSD (F,F)
pediatric and • Other psychiatric/behavioral • PTSD (F,F) • Acute psychosis (C,C)
geriatric patients) disorders to be determined • Other psychiatric/behavioral • Cognitive disorders (F,F)
locally (S,S) disorders to be determined
• Thought disorders (F,F)
locally (S,S)
• Mood disorders (F,F)
• Neurotic disorders (F,F)
• Somatoform disorders (F,F)
• Factitious disorders (F,F)
• Personality disorders (F,F)
• Other psychiatric/behavior
disorders to be determined
locally (S,S)
43
enicideM

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Respiratory • Respiratory • Respiratory distress/failure/ • Respiratory distress/failure/ • Respiratory distress/failure/arrest
distress/failure/ arrest (F,F) arrest (F,F) (F,F)
arrest (F,F)
(Include psychosocial • Upper airway obstruction (F,F) • Upper airway diseases: foreign • Upper airway diseases: foreign body,
aspects of age- • Upper airway body, croup, epiglottitis (C,F) croup, epiglottitis (C,C)
• Lower airway disease: Asthma,
related assessment obstruction (S,S) bronchiolitis, pneumonia, • Lower airway disease: Asthma, • Lower airway disease: Asthma,
and treatment • Lower airway chronic obstructive pulmonary bronchiolitis, pneumonia, bronchiolitis, pneumonia, chronic
modifications for the disease: Asthma, disease (COPD) (F,F) chronic obstructive pulmonary obstructive pulmonary disease
bronchiolitis, disease (COPD) (C,F) (COPD), bronchopulmonary
major or common • Spontaneous pneumothorax
pneumonia, dysplasia (C,C)
diseases and/ (F,F) • Spontaneous pneumothorax
chronic obstructive
or emergencies pulmonary disease • Pulmonary edema (F,F) (F,F) • Spontaneous pneumothorax (C,C)
associated with (COPD) (S,S) • Pulmonary edema (C,F) • Pulmonary edema (C,C)
• Other respiratory disorders to
pediatric and be determined locally (S,S) • Other respiratory disorders to • Other respiratory disorders to be
geriatric patients) be determined locally (S,S) determined locally (S,S)
Toxicology • Carbon monoxide • Carbon monoxide poisoning • Carbon monoxide poisoning • Carbon monoxide poisoning (C,C)
poisoning (S,S) (S,S) (S,S)
• Nerve agent poisoning (S,S)
(Include psychosocial • Nerve agent • Nerve agent poisoning (S,S) • Nerve agent poisoning (S,S)
• Opioid toxicity (F,F)
aspects of age- poisoning (S,S)
• Opioid toxicity (S,S) • Opioid toxicity (F,F)
related assessment • Opioid toxicity (S,S) • How and when to contact a poison
• How and when to contact a • How and when to contact a control center (S,S)
and treatment
• How and when to poison control center (S,S) poison control center (S,S)
modifications for the contact a poison • Poisons (inhaled, ingested, injected,
• Poisons (inhaled, ingested, • Poisons (inhaled, ingested, absorbed) (F,F)
major or common control center (S,S)
injected, absorbed) (F,F) injected, absorbed) (F,F)
diseases and/ • Alcohol intoxication and withdrawal
or emergencies • Alcohol intoxication and • Alcohol intoxication and (C,C)
withdrawal (F,F) withdrawal (F,F)
associated with • Toxidromes (C,C)
pediatric and • Other toxicological disorders to • Other toxicological disorders to - Cholinergic
be determined locally (S,S) be determined locally (S,S)
geriatric patients)
- Anticholinergic
- Sympathomimetic
- Sedative/hypnotics
- Opioid
- Corrosive
- Knockdown
• Chronic or maintenance medications
(C,C)
• Drugs of abuse (C,C)
• Non-FDA approved medications and
supplements (C,C)
• Serotonin Syndrome (C,C)
• Malignant Hyperthermia (C,C)
• Other toxicological disorders to be
determined locally (S,S)
44
enicideM

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Shock and Uses assessment information Applies knowledge of the Applies knowledge to Integrates knowledge of
to recognize shock, causes, pathophysiology provide basic and selected causes and pathophysiology
Resuscitation
respiratory failure or arrest, and management of shock, advanced emergency care into the management of
and cardiac arrest based on respiratory failure or arrest, and transportation based on cardiac arrest and peri-arrest
assessment findings and cardiac failure or arrest, assessment findings for a states.
manages the emergency termination of resuscitative patient in shock, respiratory
while awaiting additional efforts and post resuscitation failure or arrest, cardiac
emergency response. management. failure or arrest, termination
of resuscitative efforts
and post resuscitation
management.
Shock • Definition (S,S) • Essential components in • Essential components in • Essential components in
normal perfusion (F,S) normal perfusion (F,F) normal perfusion (C,C)
• Physiologic response (S,S)
(Include • Physiologic response (S,S) • Physiologic response (F,F) • Physiologic response (C,C)
psychosocial
• Types of shock (S,S) • Types of shock (F,F) • Types of shock (C,C)
aspects of age-
• Treatment of shock (S,S) • Treatment of shock, • Treatment of shock,
related assessment
hypoperfusion and hypoperfusion and
and treatment dehydration (C,C) dehydration (C,C)
modifications • Complications of shock (F,F) • Complications of shock (C,C)
for pediatric and
geriatric patients) • Circulatory assist devices • Circulatory assist devices
(F,F) (C,C)
Resuscitation • Ethical issues in resuscitation • Ethical issues in resuscitation • Ethical issues in resuscitation • Ethical issues in resuscitation
(S,S) (C,C) (C,C) (C,C)
from Cardiac
• CPR physiology (S,S) • CPR physiology (F,F) • CPR physiology (F,F) • CPR physiology (C,C)
Arrest
• Resuscitation system • Resuscitation system • Resuscitation system • Resuscitation system
components (S,S) components (F,F) components (F,F) components (C,C)
(Include
• Special arrest and peri-arrest • Special arrest and peri-arrest • Special arrest and peri-arrest • Special arrest and peri-arrest
psychosocial
situations (S,S) situations (F,F) situations (F,F) situations (C,C)
aspects of age-
related assessment • Postresuscitation support • Postresuscitation support (C,C) • Postresuscitation support (C,C)
(F,F)
and treatment • Termination of resuscitation • Termination of resuscitation
modifications • Termination of resuscitation (C,C) (C,C)
(F,F)
for pediatric and • Premorbid conditions (C,C)
geriatric patients)
45
noitaticsuseR
dna
kcohS

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Trauma Uses knowledge to recognize Applies knowledge to provide Applies knowledge to Integrates assessment findings
and manage life threats based basic emergency care and provide basic and selected with principles of epidemiology
on assessment findings for an transportation based on advanced emergency care and pathophysiology to
acutely injured patient while assessment findings for an and transportation based on formulate a field impression
awaiting additional emergency acutely injured patient. assessment findings for an to implement a treatment/
medical response. acutely injured patient. disposition plan for an acutely
injured patient.
Trauma Overview No knowledge related to this • Trauma scoring (F,F) • Trauma scoring (F,F) • Trauma scoring (C,C)
competency is applicable at • Transport and destination • Transport and destination • Transport and destination
(Include psychosocial this level. issues (F,F) issues (F,F) issues (C,C)
aspects of age-related
• Transport mode (F,F) • Transport mode (F,F) • Transport mode (F,F)
assessment and
treatment modifications
for the major or common
diseases and/or
emergencies associated
with pediatric and
geriatric patients)
Abdominal and • Blunt versus penetrating • Blunt versus penetrating • Blunt versus penetrating • Blunt versus penetrating
mechanisms (S,S) mechanisms (F,S) mechanisms (F,F) mechanisms (F,F)
Genitourinary Trauma
• Evisceration (S,S) • Evisceration (S,S) • Evisceration (S,S) • Evisceration (S,S)
(Include psychosocial • Impaled object (S,S) • Impaled object (S,S) • Impaled object (S,S) • Impaled object (S,S)
aspects of age-related • Solid and hollow organ injuries • Solid and hollow organ injuries • Solid and hollow organ injuries
assessment and (F,S) (F,F) (F,F)
treatment modifications
• Injuries to the internal or • Injuries to the internal or • Injuries to the internal or
for the major or common external genitalia (F,S) external genitalia (F,F) external genitalia (F,F)
diseases and/or
• Vascular injury (F,F) • Vascular injury (F,F)
emergencies associated
• Retroperitoneal injuries (F,F) • Retroperitoneal injuries (F,F)
with pediatric and
geriatric patients)
Bleeding • Bleeding (S,S) • Bleeding (F,F) • Bleeding (F,F) • Bleeding (F,F)
• Fluid resuscitation (C,C) • Fluid resuscitation (C,C)
(Include psychosocial
aspects of age-related
assessment and
treatment modifications
for the major or common
diseases and/or
emergencies associated
with pediatric and
geriatric patients)
46
amuarT

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Chest Trauma • Blunt versus penetrating • Blunt versus penetrating • Blunt versus penetrating • Blunt versus penetrating
mechanisms (S,S) mechanisms (F,S) mechanisms (F,S) mechanisms (F,S)
(Include psychosocial • Open chest wound (S,S) • Open chest wound (S,S) • Open chest wound (S,S) • Open chest wound (S,S)
aspects of age-related
• Impaled object (S,S) • Impaled object (S,S) • Impaled object (S,S) • Impaled object (S,S)
assessment and
• Hemothorax (F,S) • Hemothorax (F,F) • Hemothorax (C,C)
treatment modifications
for the major or • Pneumothorax (F,S) • Pneumothorax (F,F) • Pneumothorax (C,C)
common diseases • Cardiac tamponade (F,S) • Cardiac tamponade (F,F) • Cardiac tamponade (C,C)
and/or emergencies
• Rib fractures (F,S) • Rib fractures (F,F) • Rib fractures (C,C)
associated with
• Flail chest (F,S) • Flail chest (F,F) • Flail chest (C,C)
pediatric and geriatric
patients) • Commotio cordis (F,S) • Commotio cordis (F,S) • Commotio cordis (F,S)
• Traumatic aortic disruption • Traumatic aortic disruption
(F,F) (C,C)
• Pulmonary contusion (F,F) • Pulmonary contusion (C,C)
• Blunt cardiac injury (F,F) • Blunt cardiac injury (C,C)
• Traumatic asphyxia (F,F) • Traumatic asphyxia (C,C)
• Tracheobronchial disruption
(C,C)
• Diaphragmatic rupture (C,C)
Environmental • Drowning (S,S) • Drowning (F,F) • Drowning (F,F) • Drowning (C,C)
Emergencies • Temperature-related illness • Temperature-related illness • Temperature-related illness • Temperature-related illness
(S,S) (F,F) (F,F) (C,C)
• Bites and envenomations • Bites and envenomations (F,F) • Bites and envenomations (F,F) • Bites and envenomations
(Include psychosocial
(S,S) (C,C)
aspects of age-related • Lightning injury (F,F) • Lightning injury (F,F)
• Lightning injury (S,S) • Lightning injury (C,C)
assessment and • Other environmental • Other environmental
treatment modifications • Other environmental emergencies to be determined emergencies to be determined • Other environmental
emergencies to be determined locally (S,S) locally (S,S) emergencies to be determined
for the major or
locally (S,S) locally (S,S)
common diseases
and/or emergencies
associated with
pediatric and geriatric
patients)
47
amuarT

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Head, Facial, Neck, • Life threats (S,S) • Life threats (S,S) • Life threats (S,S) • Life threats (S,S)
and Spine Trauma • Spine trauma (S,S) • Spine trauma (F,F) • Spine trauma (F,F) • Spine trauma (C,C)
• Penetrating neck trauma (F,F) • Penetrating neck trauma (F,F) • Penetrating neck trauma (C,C)
(Include psychosocial • Laryngotracheal injuries (F,F) • Laryngotracheal injuries (C,F) • Laryngotracheal injuries (C,C)
aspects of age-related • Shaken Baby Syndrome (F,F) • Shaken Baby Syndrome (F,F) • Shaken Baby Syndrome (F,F)
assessment and
• Facial fractures (S,S) • Facial fractures (C,F) • Facial fractures (C,F)
treatment modifications
• Skull fractures (S,S) • Skull fractures (S,S) • Skull fractures (C,C)
for the major or common
diseases and/or • Foreign bodies in the eyes (S,S) • Foreign bodies in the eyes (S,S) • Foreign bodies in the eyes (S,S)
emergencies associated • Globe rupture (S,S) • Globe rupture (S,S) • Globe rupture (S,S)
with pediatric and
• Dental trauma (S,S) • Dental trauma (S,S) • Dental trauma (S,S)
geriatric patients)
• Severe epistaxis (S,S) • Severe epistaxis (S,S) • Severe epistaxis (S,S)
• Unstable facial fractures (F,F)
• Orbital fractures (F,F)
• Perforated tympanic membrane
(F,F)
• Mandibular fractures (C,C)
Multi-System Trauma • Multi-system • Multi-system trauma (F,F) • Multi-system trauma (C,F) • Multi-system trauma (C,C)
trauma (S,S)
• Blast injuries (F,F) • Blast injuries (F,F) • Blast injuries (C,C)
(Include psychosocial
aspects of age-related
assessment and
treatment modifications
for the major or common
diseases and/or
emergencies associated
with pediatric and
geriatric patients)
Nervous System • Traumatic brain • Traumatic brain injury (F,F) • Traumatic brain injury (C,F) • Traumatic brain injury (C,C)
injury (S,S)
Trauma • Spinal cord injury (F,F) • Spinal cord injury (F,F) • Spinal cord injury (C,C)
• Spinal shock (C,C)
(Include psychosocial • Cauda equina syndrome (F,F)
aspects of age-related • Nerve root injury (F,F)
assessment and
• Peripheral nerve injury (F,F)
treatment modifications
for the major or common
diseases and/or
emergencies associated
with pediatric and
geriatric patients)
48
amuarT

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Orthopedic Trauma • Open fractures (S,S) • Open fractures (F,F) • Open fractures (F,F) • Open fractures (C,C)
• Closed fractures (S,S) • Closed fractures (F,F) • Closed fractures (F,F) • Closed fractures (C,C)
(Include psychosocial
• Dislocations (S,S) • Dislocations (F,F) • Dislocations (F,F) • Dislocations (C,C)
aspects of age-related
assessment and • Amputations (S,S) • Amputations/replantation (F,F) • Amputations/replantation • Amputations/replantation
(C,F) (C,F)
treatment modifications • Upper and lower extremity
for the major or common orthopedic trauma (F,F) • Upper and lower extremity • Upper and lower extremity
orthopedic trauma (F,F) orthopedic trauma (C,C)
diseases and/or • Sprains/strains (F,F)
emergencies associated • Sprains/strains (F,F) • Sprains/strains (F,F)
• Pelvic fractures (F,F)
with pediatric and • Pelvic fractures (C,F) • Pelvic fractures (C,F)
geriatric patients)
• Pediatric fractures (F,F)
• Tendon laceration/
transection/ rupture (Achilles
and patellar) (F,F)
Soft Tissue Trauma • Wounds (avulsion, bite, • Wounds (avulsion, bite, • Wounds (avulsion, bite, • Wounds (avulsion, bite,
laceration, puncture, incision) laceration, puncture, incision) laceration, puncture, incision) laceration, puncture, incision)
(S,S) (F,F) (F,F) (C,C)
(Include psychosocial
aspects of age-related • Burns (electrical, chemical, • Burns (electrical, chemical, • Burns (electrical, chemical, • Burns (electrical, chemical,
assessment and thermal) including inhalation thermal, radiation) including thermal, radiation) including thermal, radiation) including
injury (S,S) inhalation injury (F,F) inhalation injury (F,F) inhalation injury (C,C)
treatment modifications
for the major or common • Chemicals in the eye and on • Chemicals in the eye and on • Chemicals in the eye and on • Chemicals in the eye and on
the skin (S,S) the skin (S,S) the skin (S,S) the skin (S,S)
diseases and/or
emergencies associated • Crush/compartment syndrome • Crush/compartment syndrome • Crush/compartment syndrome
with pediatric and (S,S) (F,S) (C,C)
geriatric patients) • High-pressure injection injury • High-pressure injection injury • High-pressure injection injury
(S,S) (S,S) (S,S)
Special Considerations • Pregnant patient (S,S) • Pregnant patient (F,F) • Pregnant patient (C,F) • Pregnant patient (C,C)
in Trauma • Pediatric patient (S,S) • Pediatric patient (F,F) • Pediatric patient (C,F) • Pediatric patient (C,C)
• Geriatric patient (S,S) • Geriatric patient (F,F) • Geriatric patient (C,F) • Geriatric patient (C,C)
• Cognitively impaired patient • Cognitively impaired patient • Cognitively impaired patient
(F,F) (C,F) (C,C)
49
amuarT

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Special Patient Recognizes and Applies knowledge of Applies knowledge of growth, Integrates assessment findings with
manages life threats growth, development and development and aging and principles of pathophysiology and
Populations
based on simple aging and assessment assessment findings to provide knowledge of psychosocial needs
assessment findings for findings to provide basic basic and selected advanced to formulate a field impression and
a patient with special emergency care and emergency care and transportation implement a treatment/disposition plan
needs while awaiting transportation for a patient for a patient with special needs. for patients with special needs.
additional emergency with special needs.
response.
Gynecology • Shock associated with • Vaginal bleeding (F,F) • Vaginal bleeding (F,F) • Vaginal bleeding (C,C)
vaginal bleeding (S,S)
• Infections (S,S) • Infections (S,S) • Infections (F,F)
(Include psychosocial
aspects of age-related • Other gynecological • Other gynecological disorders to • Ovarian emergencies (F,F)
assessment and disorders to be determined be determined locally (S,S) • Vaginal foreign body (F,F)
treatment modifications locally (S,S)
for the major or • Other gynecological disorders to be
common diseases determined locally (S,S)
and/or emergencies
associated with
pediatric and geriatric
patients)
Obstetrics • Normal delivery (S,S) • Normal delivery (F,F) • Normal delivery (F,F) • Normal delivery (C,C)
• Vaginal bleeding in the • Vaginal bleeding in the • Vaginal bleeding in the pregnant • Vaginal bleeding in the pregnant patient (S,S)
pregnant patient (S,S) pregnant patient (S,S) patient (S,S)
• Normal pregnancy (anatomy and physiology)
• Normal pregnancy (anatomy • Normal pregnancy (anatomy and (C,C)
and physiology) (F,F) physiology) (F,F)
• Pathophysiology of complications of
• Pathophysiology of • Pathophysiology of complications pregnancy (C,C)
complications of pregnancy of pregnancy (F,F)
• Assessment of the pregnant patient (C,C)
(F,F)
• Assessment of the pregnant patient
• Abnormal delivery (nuchal cord, prolapsed
• Assessment of the pregnant (F,F)
cord, breech, shoulder dystocia, prematurity,
patient (F,F)
• Abnormal delivery (nuchal cord, multiparity) (C,C)
• Abnormal delivery (nuchal prolapsed cord, breech, shoulder
• Third trimester and antepartum bleeding
cord, prolapsed cord, dystocia, prematurity, multiparity)
(placenta previa. placental abruption) (F,F)
breech, shoulder dystocia, (F,F)
prematurity, multiparity) (F,F) • Spontaneous abortion/miscarriage (C,C)
• Third trimester and antepartum
• Third trimester and bleeding (placenta previa. placental • Ectopic pregnancy (C,C)
antepartum bleeding abruption) (F,F)
• Preeclampsia/eclampsia (C,C)
(placenta previa. placental
• Spontaneous abortion/miscarriage
abruption) (F,F) • Postpartum complications (C,C)
(F,F)
• Spontaneous abortion/ • High-risk pregnancy (C,C)
• Ectopic pregnancy (F,F)
miscarriage (F,F)
• Complications of labor (fetal distress,
• Preeclampsia/eclampsia (F,F)
• Ectopic pregnancy (F,F) premature rupture of membranes, rupture of
• Postpartum complications (C,C) uterus) (C,C)
• Preeclampsia/eclampsia
(F,F) • Hyperemesis gravidarum (S,S)
• Postpartum complications • Postpartum depression (S,S)
(S,S)
50
snoitalupoP
tneitaP
laicepS

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Neonatal • Newborn stabilization (S,S) • Newborn stabilization (F,F) • Newborn stabilization (F,F) • Newborn stabilization (C,C)
Care • Neonatal resuscitation (S,S) • Neonatal resuscitation (F,F) • Neonatal resuscitation (F,F) • Neonatal resuscitation (C,C)
• Anatomy and physiology of neonatal
circulation (C,C)
Pediatrics The Education Standards now integrate assessment, diagnostic, treatment and disposition modifications for pediatric-specific diseases and
emergencies into each section of the document.
Geriatrics The Education Standards now integrate assessment, diagnostic, treatment and disposition modifications for geriatric-specific diseases and
emergencies into each section of the document
Patients • Recognizing and reporting • Recognizing and reporting • Recognizing and reporting • Recognizing and reporting abuse
abuse and neglect (S,S) abuse and neglect (S,S) abuse and neglect (S,S) and neglect (S,S)
with Special
• Abuse/Intimate partner • Abuse/Intimate partner • Abuse/Intimate partner violence
Challenges violence (S,S) violence (F,F) (C,C)
• Neglect (S,S) • Neglect (F,F) • Neglect (C,C)
• Child/dependent adult • Child/dependent adult • Child/dependent adult maltreatment
maltreatment (S,S) maltreatment (F,F) (C,C)
• Homelessness (S,S) • Homelessness (F,F) • Homelessness (F,F)
• Poverty (S,S) • Poverty (F,F) • Poverty (C,C)
• Bariatrics (S,S) • Bariatrics (F,F) • Bariatrics (C,C)
• Technology dependent (locally • Technology dependent (locally • Technology dependent (vagal nerve
determined) (S,S) determined) (F,F) stimulators, CSF diversion devices
or shunts, VAD, pacemakers, gastric
• Hospice/ terminally ill (S,S) • Hospice/ terminally ill (F,F)
tubes and others to be locally
• Tracheostomy care/dysfunction • Tracheostomy care/dysfunction determined) (C,C)
(S,S) (F,F)
• Hospice/ terminally ill (C,C)
• Homecare (S,S) • Homecare (F,F)
• Tracheostomy care/dysfunction
• Sensory deficit/loss (S,S) • Sensory deficit/loss (F,F) (C,C)
• Developmental disability (S,S) • Developmental disability (F,F) • Homecare (F,F)
• Autism Spectrum Disorder • Autism Spectrum Disorder • Sensory deficit/loss (F,F)
(S,S) (F,F)
• Developmental disability (F,F)
• Orthotics/prosthetics (S,S) • Orthotics/prosthetics (S,S)
• Autism Spectrum Disorder (F,F)
• Orthotics/prosthetics (S,S)
51
snoitalupoP
tneitaP
laicepS

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
EMS Knowledge of operational roles Same as EMR Level Same as EMR Level Same as EMR Level
and responsibilities to ensure
Operations
patient, public and personnel
safety
Emergency • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of
emergency response and radio emergency response and radio emergency response and radio emergency response and radio
Response
communications (S,S) communications (S,S) communications (S,S) communications (S,S)
Vehicles • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of operating
operating emergency vehicles operating emergency vehicles operating emergency vehicles emergency vehicles (S,S)
(S,S) (S,S) (S,S)
• Pediatric transport considerations
• Pediatric transport • Pediatric transport (F,F)
considerations (F,F) considerations (F,F)
• Risks and responsibilities of transport
• Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of (F,F)
transport (F,F) transport (F,F)
Incident • Establish and work within the • Establish and work within the • Establish and work within the • Establish and work within the incident
incident management system incident management system incident management system management system (F,F)
Management
(S,S) (F,F)
(F,F) • Understand the principles of Crew
• Understand the principles of Resource Management (F,F)
(The extent • Understand the principles of Crew
Crew Resource Management
of information Resource Management (F,F) (F,F)
presented in this
area will vary at
the regional and
local level.)
Multiple • Operational goals (F,F) • Operational goals (F,F) • Operational goals (F,F) • Operational goals (F,F)
Casualty • Field triage (F,F) • Field triage (F,F) • Field triage (F,F) • Field triage (F,F)
Incidents • Destination determination (F,F) • Destination determination (F,F) • Destination determination (F,F)
• Treatment principles (F,F) • Treatment principles (F,F)
• Treatment principles (F,F)
(The extent
of information
presented in this
area will vary at
the regional and
local level.)
Air Medical • Safe air medical operations (S,S) • Safe air medical operations (S,S) • Safe air medical operations (S,S) • Safe air medical operations (S,S)
• Criteria for utilizing air medical • Criteria for utilizing air medical • Criteria for utilizing air medical • Criteria for utilizing air medical
(The extent response (S,S) response (S,S) response (S,S)
response (S,S)
of information
• Medical risks/needs/advantages • Medical risks/needs/advantages • Medical risks/needs/advantages (F,F)
presented in this (S,S) • Medical risks/needs/advantages (F,F)
area will vary at (F,F)
the regional and
local level.)
52
snoitarepO
SME

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Rescue Operations • Safety principles of rescue • Safety principles of rescue • Safety principles of rescue • Safety principles of
operations (S,S) operations (S,S) operations (S,S) rescue operations (S,S)
(The extent of information
presented in this area will
vary at the regional and
local level.)
Hazardous Materials • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and
operating on the scene of a operating on the scene of a operating on the scene of a responsibilities of
hazardous materials incident hazardous materials incident operating on the (The extent of information hazardous materials incident
(S,S) (S,S) scene of a hazardous
presented in this area will (S,S)
materials incident (S,S)
vary at the regional and
local level.)
Mass Casualty Incidents • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and responsibilities of • Risks and
operating on the scene of a operating on the scene of a operating on the scene of a responsibilities of
due to Terrorism and
natural or man-made disaster natural or man-made disaster operating on the scene
natural or man-made disaster
Disaster (F,F) (F,F) (F,F) of a natural or man-
made disaster (F,F)
(The extent of information
presented in this area will
vary at the regional and
local level.)
53
snoitarepO
SME

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
Clinical Behavior/Judgment
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Assessment • Perform a simple assessment • Perform a basic history and • Perform a basic history and • Perform a comprehensive
to identify life threats, identify physical examination to identify physical examination to identify history and physical
injuries requiring spinal motion acute complaints and monitor acute complaints and monitor examination to identify factors
restriction and conditions changes. changes. affecting the health and health
requiring treatment within the needs of a patient.
• Formulate a field diagnosis • Formulate a field diagnosis
scope of practice of the EMR:
based upon an actual and/or based upon an actual and/or • Relate assessment findings
potential illness or injury. potential illness or injury. to underlying pathological and
physiological changes in the
patient’s condition.
• Integrate and synthesize the
multiple determinants of health
and clinical care.
• Formulate a field diagnosis
based on an analysis of
comprehensive assessment
findings, anatomy, physiology,
pathophysiology and
epidemiology.
• Perform health screening and
referrals.
Therapeutic • Effectively communicates in a non-discriminatory manner that addresses inherent or unconscious bias, is culturally aware and sensitive,
and intended to improve patient outcome.
Communication and
Cultural Humility
Psychomotor Skills • Safely and effectively perform all psychomotor skills within the National EMS Scope of Practice Model AND state Scope of Practice at this level.
54

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
Clinical Behavior/Judgment
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Professionalism Demonstrate professional affective domain behaviors including but not limited to: Is a role model of exemplary
professional affective domain
• Integrity
behaviors including but not limited
• Empathy/compassion
to:
• Self-motivation
• Appearance/personal hygiene • Integrity
• Self-confidence • Empathy/compassion
• Communications • Self-motivation
• Time management • Appearance/personal hygiene
• Teamwork/diplomacy • Self-confidence
• Respect • Communications
• Patient advocacy • Time management
• Careful delivery of service • Teamwork/diplomacy
• Lifelong learning • Respect
• Patient advocacy
• Careful delivery of service
• Lifelong learning
Decision Making • Initiates simple interventions • Initiates interventions based on assessment findings intended • Performs interventions as part
based on assessment to provide symptom relief (within the provider’s scope of of a treatment plan intended
findings. practice) while providing access to definitive care to provide symptom relief and
improve the overall health of the
• Evaluates the effectiveness of interventions and modifies
patient.
treatment plan accordingly.
• Evaluates the effectiveness
of interventions and modifies
treatment plan accordingly.
• Evaluates decision making
strategy for cognitive errors to
enhance future critical thinking
skills (metacognition)
Record Keeping • Report and document • Report and document assessment findings, interventions performed, and clinical decision making
assessment findings and
interventions performed.
Team Dynamics • Manage the scene until care • The entry-level clinician serves as a team member, while gaining the experience necessary to
is transferred to an EMS function as the team leader.
team member licensed at a
higher level arrives.
Safety • Ensure the safety of the rescuer, other public safety personnel, civilians and the patient.
55

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
Educational Infrastructure
EMR EMT AEMT2 Paramedic
Educational • Facility sponsored or approved by sponsoring agency Reference
• Sponsoring agency commitment to diversity, equity and inclusion Committee on
Facilities • ADA compliant facility
Accreditation
• Sufficient space for class size
for EMS
• Controlled environment
Professions
(CoAEMSP)
Student Space • Provide space sufficient for students to attend classroom sessions, take notes, and participate in classroom activities Standards and
• Provide space for students to participate in kinematic learning and practice activities
Guidelines
(www.coaemsp.
org)1
Instructional • Provide basic instructional support material
• Provide audio, visual, and kinematic aids to support and supplement didactic instruction
Resources
Instructor • Provide space for instructor preparation
Preparation • Provide support equipment for instructor preparation
Resources
Storage Space • Provide adequate and secure storage space for instructional materials
1 The National EMS Education Agenda for the Future: A Systems Approach (2000) calls for national accreditation of Paramedic programs. The Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education
Programs (CAAHEP) accredits programs upon the recommendation of the Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the Emergency Medical Services Professions (CoAEMSP). CAAHEP
is the only national agency that offers Paramedic educational programmatic accreditation and is used or recognized by most states. Recognition of national accreditation remains the responsibility of
each state.
2 The 2019 and 2021 updated National Scope of Practice Model call for national accreditation of AEMT programs. The target for full implementation of AEMT program accreditation is January 1, 2025.
Until that date, AEMT programs should reference the existing infrastructure suggestions within this document. The Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP) accredits
programs upon the recommendation of the Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the Emergency Medical Services Professions (CoAEMSP).CAAHEP is the only national agency that
offers EMS programmatic accreditation and is used or recognized by most states. Recognition of national accreditation remains the responsibility of each state.
56

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
Educational Infrastructure
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Sponsorship Sponsoring organizations shall be one of the following: Reference
• Accredited educational institution Committee on
Accreditation
• Public safety organization
for EMS
• Accredited hospital, clinic or medical center, or Professions
• Other state approved institution or organization (CoAEMSP)
Standards and
Guidelines
Programmatic • Sponsoring organization shall have programmatic approval by authority having jurisdiction for program approval (state) (www.
Approval
coaemsp.org)1
Faculty Course primary instructors should:
• Be educated at a level higher than they are teaching; however, as a minimum, they must be educated at the level they are
teaching
• Have completed an approved instructor training program or equivalent
Medical Director • Provide medical oversight for all medical aspects of instruction
Oversight
Hospital/Clinical • None required at this level • The student must demonstrate • The student must demonstrate
the ability to perform an adequate the ability to perform an adequate
Experience assessment and implement an assessment and implement an
adequate treatment plan. adequate treatment plan.
- These can be performed in an
emergency department, ambulance,
clinic, nursing home, doctor’s office,
on a standardized patient or in an
alternative clinical environment when
clinical access is not available.
57

National EMS Education Standards
Back to Table of Contents >
Educational Infrastructure
EMR EMT AEMT Paramedic
Field Experience • None required at this level • The student should participate in and document • The student must participate in and Reference
patient contacts in a field experience in an document both patient contacts and team Committee on
ambulance, mobile health care experience, leadership roles in a field experience
Accreditation for
or simulated environment when ambulance approved by the medical director and
EMS Professions
experience is not available as approved by the program director.
medical director and program director. This may (CoAEMSP)
occur in an ambulance, ambulance experience, Standards and
or simulated environment when ambulance Guidelines (www.
experiences are not available. coaemsp.org)1
Course Length • Instructors may use a variety of formats to • Instructors may use a variety of formats to • Instructors may use a variety of formats
deliver content including but not limited to: deliver content including but not limited to: to deliver content including but not
limited to:
- Independent student preparation - Independent student preparation
- Independent student preparation
- Synchronous or asynchronous - Synchronous or asynchronous instruction
instruction - Synchronous or asynchronous
- Face-to-face instruction
instruction
- Face-to-face instruction
- Pre- or co-requisites
- Face-to-face instruction
- Pre- or co-requisites
• Course length should be based on - Pre- or co-requisites
• Course length should be based on competency, not hours
competency, not hours • Course length should be based on
- Consensus opinion is that students should
competency, not hours
- Consensus opinion is that students need a minimum of 150 clock hours including
should need a minimum of 48 didactic the four integrated phases of education - Consensus opinion is that
and laboratory clock hours to cover the (didactic, laboratory, clinical and field) to cover students should need a minimum
material. the material of 200 clock hours beyond EMT
requirements including the four
integrated phases of education
(didactic, laboratory, clinical and
field) to cover the material
Course Design • Provide the following components of • Provide the following components of instruction:
instruction:
- Didactic instruction
- Didactic instruction - Skills laboratories
- Skills laboratories - Hospital/clinical experience
- Field experience
Student • Perform knowledge, skill and professional behavior evaluation based on educational standards and program objectives
Assessment • Provide several methods of assessing achievement
• Provide assessment that measures, as a minimum, entry-level competency in all domains
Program • Provide evaluation of program instructional effectiveness
Evaluation • Provide evaluation of organizational and administrative effectiveness of program
58

Back to Table of Contents >
Glossary
Academic institution – Body or establishment instituted for and instructors do not interact at the same time.
an educational purpose that provides college credit or awards
degrees. Certification – The issuing of a certificate by a private agency
based upon deemed competency established through standards
Accreditation – The granting of approval by an official review adopted by that agency and met by the individual.
board after meeting specific requirements. Typical requisites may
cover areas such as program structure, processes, resources Cognitive domain – Describes learning that takes place through
and student evaluation. The review board is nongovernmental the process of thinking—it deals with facts and knowledge.
and the review is collegial and based on self-assessment, (NAEMSE, 2020)
peer assessment and judgment. The purpose of accreditation
is student protection and public accountability. Additionally, Competency – Expected behavior or knowledge to be achieved
accreditation can provide consistent quality education evaluation within a defined area of practice.
for a program’s continual improvement and provides for a more
consistent and uniform graduate competency. Credential – Generic term referring to all forms of professional
qualification.
Advanced-level care – Care that has greater potential benefit
to the patient, but also greater potential risk to the patient if Credentialing – The umbrella term that includes the concepts
improperly or inappropriately performed. It is more difficult to of accreditation, licensure, registration and professional
attain and maintain competency in and requires significant certification. Credentialing can establish criteria for fairness,
background knowledge in basic and applied sciences. This level quality, competence, and/or safety for professional services
of care includes invasive and pharmacological interventions. provided by authorized individuals, for products or for educational
endeavors. Credentialing is the process by which an entity,
Affective domain – Describes learning in terms of feelings/ authorized and qualified to do so, grants formal recognition to
emotions, attitudes and values. Additionally, the affective domain or records the recognition status of individuals, organizations,
covers many professional behaviors that are required by an institutions, programs, processes, services or products that meet
EMS clinician to perform his or her role as a health care provider. predetermined and standardized criteria. (NOCA, 2006)
(NAEMSE, 2020)
Credentialing agency – An organization that certifies an
Asynchronous instruction/learning – An instructional method institution’s or individual’s authority or claim of competence in a
that allows the learner to use a self-directed and self-paced course of study or completion of objectives.
learning format to move through the content of the course. In this
type of instruction, learner-to-learner and learner-to-instructor Curriculum – A particular course of study, often in a specialized
interactions are independent of time and place. Communications field. For EMS education, it has traditionally included instructional
and submission of work typically follow a schedule while learners techniques, detailed lesson plans with identified objectives and
59

Back to Table of Contents >
numerous forms of learner evaluation. Curriculum is developed In the health care delivery system, an individual who is licensed
and adopted at the education program based upon National EMS tends to enjoy a certain amount of autonomy in delivering health
Education Standards and state and local regulatory requirements. care services. Conversely, the licensed individual must satisfy
The use of local advisory groups can help tailor education to a ongoing requirements that ensure certain minimum levels of
local community’s needs. expertise. A license is generally considered a privilege, not a right.
Didactic – The instructional theory, the lesson content. Medical oversight – Physician review and approval of clinical
(NAEMSE, 2020) content and matters relevant to medical authority.
Distributive education – A generic term used to describe a National EMS Core Content – The document that defines the
variety of learning delivery methods that attempt to accommodate domain of out-of-hospital care.
a geographical separation (at least for some of the time) of the
instructor and learners. Distributed education includes computer National EMS Education Program Accreditation – The
and web-based instruction, distance learning through television accreditation process for institutions that sponsor EMS
or video, web-based seminars, video conferencing and electronic educational programs.
and traditional educational models.
National EMS Education Standards – The document that
Domains – A category of learning. (See Affective domain, defines the entry-level terminal knowledge content (depth
Cognitive domain, and Psychomotor domain.) (NAEMSE, 2020) and breadth), clinical behavior/judgement, and educational
infrastructure for each licensure level.
Entry-level competence – The level of competence expected
of an individual who is about to begin a career. The minimum National EMS Scope of Practice Model – The document
competence necessary to practice safely and effectively. that defines the scope of practice of the various levels of EMS
licensure.
Health screening – A test or exam performed to find a condition
before symptoms begin. Screening tests may help find diseases Patient simulation – An alternative to a human patient to help
or conditions early when they may be easier to treat. (Medline students improve patient assessment and management skills;
Plus definition) a high-fidelity patient simulator provides realistic simulation that
responds physiologically to student therapies. These simulators have
Instructional Guidelines – An emeritus resource document that realistic features such as chests that rise and fall with respirations,
provided crossover guidance for instructional content within the pupils that react to light, pulses that can be palpated, etc.
2009 National EMS Education Standards.
Post-graduate internship and/or experience – Experience gained
Licensure – The act of granting an entity permission to do after the student has completed and graduated from school.
something that the entity could not legally do without such
permission. Licensing is generally viewed by legislative bodies
as a regulatory effort to protect the public from potential harm.
60

Back to Table of Contents >
Practice analysis – A study conducted to determine the Scope of practice – The description of what a licensed individual
frequency and criticality of the tasks performed in practice. legally can and cannot perform.
Preceptor – A clinical teacher or instructor who is responsible for Standardized patient – An individual who has been thoroughly
evaluating and ensuring student progress during hospital and field trained to accurately simulate a real patient with a medical
experiences. This individual typically has training to be able to condition; a standardized patient plays the role of a patient
function effectively in the role. for students learning patient assessment, history taking skills,
communication skills and other skills.
Primary instructor – A person who possesses the appropriate
academic and/or allied health credentials and understanding Standard of care – The domain of acceptable practice,
of the principles and theories of education, and the required as defined by scope of practice, current evidence, industry
instructional experience necessary to provide quality instruction to consensus and experts. Standard of care can vary depending on
students. (NAEMSE, 2020) the independent variables of each situation.
Program director – The individual responsible for an educational Synchronous instruction – Instructional method whereby
program or programs. learners and instructors interact at the same time, either in
the classroom or via a computer-driven course. This method
Psychomotor domain – Describes learning that takes place allows for more immediate learner guidance and feedback using
through the attainment of skills and bodily or kinesthetic face-to-face, instant text-based messaging or real-time voice
movements. (NAEMSE, 2020) communications.
Registration agency – An agency that is traditionally responsible Team leader – Someone who leads the call and provides
for providing a product used to evaluate a chosen area. States guidance and direction for setting priorities, scene and patient
may voluntarily adopt this product as part of their licensing assessment and management. The team leader may not actually
process. The registration agency is also responsible for gathering perform all the interventions but may assign others to do so.
and housing data to support the validity and reliability of its product.
Regulation – A rule or a statue that prescribes the management,
governance or operation parameters for a given group; tends to
be a function of administrative agencies to which a legislative
body has delegated authority to promulgate rules and regulations
to “regulate a given industry or profession.” Most regulations are
intended to protect public health, safety and welfare.
61

Back to Table of Contents >
References
National Association of EMS Physicians, (Kuehl, A. E., Ed.), NHTSA and Health Resources and Services Administration.
Prehospital Systems and Medical Oversight, Third Edition. 2002. (2000). Emergency Medical Services Education Agenda for the
Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company. Future: A Systems Approach. Washington, DC: National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration. https://www.ems.gov/pdf/education/
National Association of EMS Educators. (2020). Foundations EMS-Education-for-the-Future-A-Systems-Approach/EMS_
of Education, An EMS Approach, Third Edition. Burlington, MA: Education_Agenda.pdf
Jones and Bartlett Learning.
NHTSA and Health Resources and Services Administration.
National Organization for Competency Assurance. (2006). (2007). National EMS Scope of Practice Model. Washington, DC:
NOCA’s Basic Guide to Credentialing Terminology. Washington, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
DC: National Organization for Competency Assurance. https://www.ems.gov/education/EMSScope.pdf
Ruple, J. A., et al. (2004). State of EMS Education Research NHTSA and Health Resources and Services Administration.
Project. Prehospital Emergency Care, 9, 203-212. (2019). National EMS Scope of Practice Model. Washington,
DC, US Department of Transportation. https://www.ems.gov/pdf/
Ruple, J. A., et al. (2006). Commonalities of the EMS Education National_EMS_Scope_of_Practice_Model_2019.pdf
Workforce (2004) in the United States. Prehospital Emergency
Care, 10, 229-238. NHTSA and Health Resources and Services Administration.
(2021). National EMS Scope of Practice Model. Washington,
NHTSA. (1996). Emergency Medical Services, Agenda for DC, US Department of Transportation. https://www.ems.gov/
the Future. Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety pdf/National_EMS_Scope_of_Practice_Model_2019_Change_
Administration. http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/ems/ Notices_1_and%20_2_August_2021.pdf
agenda/emsman.html
NHTSA. (2019). Emergency Medical Services Agenda 2050.
Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
https://www.ems.gov/pdf/EMS-Agenda-2050.pdf
NHTSA. (2005). Emergency Medical Services Core Content.
Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/ems/EMSCoreContent/
images/EMSCoreContent.pdf
62

Back to Table of Contents >
Acknowledgements and Stakeholder Input
Education Standards Revision Team Leadership: Federal Partners:
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)
Director: Bryan Ericson, MEd, RN, NRP, Hurst, TX
Co-Chair: Paul Rosenberger, BS, MPA, EdD, NRP, Dallas, TX Office of EMS
Co-Chair: Art Hsieh, MA, NRP, Santa Rosa, CA
Coordinator: Kenneth Navarro, PhD(c), Dallas, TX David Bryson, EMT, EMS Specialist, Washington, DC
Medical Director: Katherine Remick, MD, FAAP, FACEP, Kate Elkins, MPH, CPH, NRP, EMS Specialist, Washington, DC
FAEMS, Austin, TX Jon Krohmer, MD, FACEP, FAEMS, OEMS Director, Washington, DC
Medical Director: Joshua Stilley, MD, FACEP, FAAEM, FAEMS,
Columbia, MO Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA),
Maternal and Child Health Bureau’s EMS for Children
Education Standards Revision Team Members*:
(EMSC) Program
Deborah Akers, NRP, Glen Allen, VA
Steve Cole, MEd, NRP, Boise, ID (Paramedic Level Lead) Sara Kinsman, MD, PhD, MCHB DCAFH Director, Washington, DC
Lindi Holt, PhD, NRP, NCEE, Indianapolis, IN (AEMT Level Lead) Theresa Morrison-Quinata, DCAFH EMSC Branch Chief,
Mark Malonzo, EdD(c), NRP, Los Angeles, CA Washington, DC
Gina Riggs, MEd, NRP, Poteau, OK Diane Pilkey, RN, MPH, DCAFH Senior Nurse Consultant,
Jose Salazar, BA, MPH, NRP, Leesburg, VA Washington, DC
Karla Short, BBA, MEd, EdD, Columbus OH (EMR/EMT
RedFlash Group:
Level Lead)
Bill Young, EdD, NRP, Richmond, KY
Tricia Duva, BA, Encinitas, CA
Michael Gerber, MPH, NRP, Washington, DC
NAEMSE Leadership:
Keith Griffiths, BA, Encinitas, CA
Linda Abrahamson, MA, RN, EMTP, NCEE, Oak Lawn, IL Wendy Martin, BS, MPC, Encinitas, CA
Stephen Perdziola, BS, Pittsburgh, PA
Administrative Support:
Jamie Royster, BS, Dallas, TX
* The Revision Team was chosen by NAEMSE in consultation with NHTSA and HRSA, and
comprised educators whose backgrounds and experiences represented a diverse range of
communities, educational institutions and EMS systems.
63

Back to Table of Contents >
Stakeholder Organizations Who Provided Input
Academy of International Mobile Health Integration National Association of State EMS Officials
American Academy of Pediatrics – NRP Steering Committee National EMS Management Association
American Ambulance Association National Fire Protection Agency
American College of Emergency Physicians National Registry of EMTs
American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma National Volunteer Fire Council
Association of Air Medical Services New Hampshire Department of Safety, Division of Fire Standards and
Training and EMS
Association of Critical Care Transport
New Jersey State EMS Council, 17th District
Commission on Accreditation of Ambulance Services
North Carolina Office of EMS
Commission on Accreditation of Medical Transport Systems
US Army
Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the EMS
Professions/Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education US Air Force
Programs
Project Meetings
Congress of Mobile Medical Professionals
EMS for Children (Health Resources and Services Administration, • First Development Meeting – May 2-3, 2019, Pittsburgh, PA
Maternal Child and Health Bureau)
• Association Liaison/Stakeholder Call – July 15, 2019
EMS for Children Innovation & Improvement Center • Second Development Meeting – October 3-4, 2019,
Washington, DC
Emergency Nurses Association
• Instructional Guideline Revision Meeting –
Georgia Department of Public Health January 30-February 1, 2020, Hurst, TX
• Association Liaison/Stakeholder Call – August 11, 2020
International Association of EMS Chiefs
• Revision Meeting (virtual) – October 9, 2020
International Association of Fire Chiefs
• Third Development Meeting (virtual) – January 28, 2021
International Association of Fire Fighters
Public Comment Periods
International Association of Flight & Critical Care Paramedics
State of Minnesota EMS Regulatory Board • August 16-September 20, 2019
• February 17-March 17, 2020
National Association of EMS Physicians
• November 13-December 14, 2020
National Association of EMTs
64

Back to Table of Contents >
Appendix A: Resources for EMS
National Organizations:
American Academy of Emergency Medicine (AAEM): https://www.aaem.org/
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP): https://www.aap.org/en-us/Pages/Default.aspx
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons (AAOS): https://www.aaos.org/
American Ambulance Association (AAA): https://ambulance.org
American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP): https://www.acep.org/
American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma (ACS COT): https://www.facs.org/Quality-Programs/Trauma
American Medical Association (AMA): https://www.ama-assn.org/
American Public Health Association (APHA): https://www.apha.org/
American Trauma Society (ATS): https://www.amtrauma.org/
Association of Air Medical Services (AAMS): https://aams.org/
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO): https://www.astho.org/
Center for Disease Control: https//www.cdc.gov/
Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP): https://www.caahep.org/
Commission on Accreditation of Ambulance Services (CAAS): https://www.caas.org/
Commission of Accreditation of Medical Transport Systems (CAMTS): https://www.camts.org/International
65

Back to Table of Contents >
National Organizations:
Commission of Accreditation of Medical Transport Systems (CAMTS): https://www.camts.org/International
Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the Emergency Medical Services Professions (CoAEMSP):
https://coaemsp.org/
Emergency Nurses Association (ENA): https://www.ena.org/
International Academies of Emergency Dispatch (IAED): https://www.emergencydispatch.org/home
International Association of Emergency Managers (IAEM): https://www.iaem.org/
International Association of EMS Chiefs (IAEMSC): https://www.iaemsc.org/
International Association of EMTs and Paramedics (IAEP): https://www.iaep.org/
International Association of Fire Chiefs (IAFC): https://www.iafc.org/
International Association of Firefighters: https://www.iaff.org/
International Association of Flight & Critical Care Paramedics (IAFCCP): https://www.iafccp.org/
National Association of County & City Health Officials (NACCHO): https://www.naccho.org/about
National Association of EMS Educators (NAEMSE): https://naemse.org/
National Association of EMS Officials (NASEMSO): https://nasemso.org/
National Association of EMS Physicians (NAEMSP): https://naemsp.org/
National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians (NAEMT): https://naemt.org/
National EMS Advisory Council: https://www.ems.gov/memsac.html
National EMS Management Association (NEMSMA): https://www.nemsma.org/
66

Back to Table of Contents >
National Organizations:
National EMS Quality Alliance (NEMSQA): https://www.nemsqa.org/
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA): https://www.nfpa.org/
National Organization of State Offices of Rural Health (NOSORH): https://nosorh.org/
National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians (NREMT): https://www.nremt.org
National Volunteer Fire Council (NVFC): https://www.nvfc.org/about/
Safe States Alliance: https://www.safestates.org/
Society for Academic Emergency Medicine: https://www.saem.org/home
Federal Agencies:
Federal Interagency Committee on EMS (FICEMS): https://www.ems.gov/ficems.html
Department of Transportation: https://www.transportation.gov/
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA): https://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/eto_tim_pse/preparedness/tim/index.htm
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA): https://www.ems.gov/
Department of Homeland Security (DHS): https://www.dhs.gov/
U.S. Fire Administration (USFA): https://www.usfa.fema.gov/
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS): https://www.hhs.gov/
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ): https://www.ahrq.gov/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): https://www.cdc.gov/
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH): https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/index.htm
67

Back to Table of Contents >
Federal Agencies:
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS): https://www.cms.gov/
Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA): https://www.hrsa.gov/
Indian Health Service (IHS): https://www.ihs.gov/
National Institutes of Health (NIH): https://www.nih.gov/
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR): https://www.phe.gov/about/aspr/Pages/default.aspx
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA): https://www.samhsa.gov/
Federal Communications Commission (FCC): https://www.fcc.gov/
Department of Defense (DoD): https://dod.defense.gov/
Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs: https://www.health.mil/About-MHS/OASDHA
Department of the Interior (DOI): https://www.doi.gov/
National Park Service (NPS): https://www.nps.gov/index.htm
Department of Agriculture (USDA): https://www.usda.gov/
U.S. Forest Service (USFS): https://www.fs.usda.gov/
Department of Labor (DOL): https://www.dol.gov/
68

Back to Table of Contents >
Other Sources:
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA): https://www.osha.gov/
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA): www.EMS.gov
American Heart Association ECC: https://cpr.heart.org/en/resuscitation-science/cpr-and-ecc-guidelines
EMSC Innovation and Improvement Center (EIIC): https://emscimprovement.center/
National EMS Advisory Council (NEMSAC): https://www.ems.gov/nemsac.html
National EMS Information System (NEMSIS): https://nemsis.org/
Prehospital Care Research Forum: https://www.cpc.mednet.ucla.edu/pcrf
Prehospital Guidelines Consortium: http://prehospitalguidelines.org/
69

December 9, 2021

